Suicide, taking your own life, is a tragic reaction to stressful life situations — and all the more tragic because suicide can be prevented. Whether you're considering suicide or know someone who feels suicidal, learn suicide warning signs and how to reach out for immediate help and professional treatment. You may save a life — your own or someone else's.It may seem like there's no way to solve your problems and that suicide is the only way to end the pain. But you can take steps to stay safe — and start enjoying your life again.If you're feeling overwhelmed by thoughts of not wanting to live or you're having urges to attempt suicide, get help now. Suicide warning signs or suicidal thoughts include:Warning signs aren't always obvious, and they may vary from person to person. Some people make their intentions clear, while others keep suicidal thoughts and feelings secret.If you're feeling suicidal, but you aren't immediately thinking of hurting yourself:Suicidal thinking doesn't get better on its own — so get help.Suicidal thoughts have many causes. Most often, suicidal thoughts are the result of feeling like you can't cope when you're faced with what seems to be an overwhelming life situation. If you don't have hope for the future, you may mistakenly think suicide is a solution. You may experience a sort of tunnel vision, where in the middle of a crisis you believe suicide is the only way out.There also may be a genetic link to suicide. People who complete suicide or who have suicidal thoughts or behavior are more likely to have a family history of suicide.Although attempted suicide is more frequent for women, men are more likely than women to complete suicide because they typically use more-lethal methods, such as a firearm.You may be at risk of suicide if you:Suicide in children and teenagers can follow stressful life events. What a young person sees as serious and insurmountable may seem minor to an adult — such as problems in school or the loss of a friendship. In some cases, a child or teen may feel suicidal due to certain life circumstances that he or she may not want to talk about, such as:If you have concerns about a friend or family member, asking about suicidal thoughts and intentions is the best way to identify risk.In rare cases, people who are suicidal are at risk of killing others and then themselves. Known as a homicide-suicide or murder-suicide, some risk factors include:Most antidepressants are generally safe, but the Food and Drug Administration requires that all antidepressants carry black box warnings, the strictest warnings for prescriptions. In some cases, children, teenagers and young adults under 25 may have an increase in suicidal thoughts or behavior when taking antidepressants, especially in the first few weeks after starting or when the dose is changed.However, keep in mind that antidepressants are more likely to reduce suicide risk in the long run by improving mood.Female 1: I have my ups and downs just like anybody else.Male 1: Maybe more than anybody else.Female 2: I can be hard to figure outMale 2: and I like my privacy.Male 3: I don't want you looking over my shoulder all the time.Female 3: But you know your kid better than anybody else and if you think he's acting different than usual,Male 1: acting really down, crying all the time for no good reasonFemale 2: or getting really mad,Female 1: not able to sleep or sleeping too much,Male 3: shutting their friends out or giving their stuff away,Female 2: acting reckless, drinking, using drugs, staying out late,Male 2: suddenly not doing stuff they used to loveFemale 3: or doing stuff that's just not like him,Male 1: it might be nothing to worry about. It might just be high schoolFemale 1: or it might be something more. He might be depressed.Female 3: Not just feeling down, really depressed.Male 2: It might be that your kid is thinking about killing himself.Male 3: It happens more than you think, more than it should.Female 3: And people say "I had no idea."Male 1: "I thought it was just a phase he was going through."Female 1: "I never thought she'd do it."Male 2: "I wish he'd come to me."Female 2: "I wish he had said something."Male 3: "I wish I'd said something."Female 3: when it's too late. So if you think your kids acting different, if she seems like a different person, say something.Male 1: Say "What's wrong? How can I help?"Female 2: and ask him straight out, "Are you thinking about killing yourself?"Female 1: It doesn't hurt to ask. In fact, it helps.Male 3: When people are thinking about killing themselves, they want somebody to ask.Male 2: They want somebody to care.Female 2: Maybe you're afraid you'll make it worse if you ask. Like you'll put the idea in their head.Male 3: Believe me, it doesn't work that way.Female 1: It doesn't hurt to ask.Female 3: In fact, the best way to keep a teenager from killing herself is to ask, "Are you thinking about killing yourself?"Male 1: And what if they say "yes"Female 2: or "maybe"Male 2: or "sometimes?"Female 3: Well, here's what you don't say,Male 3: "That's crazy."Female 2: "Don't be such a drama queen."Male 3: "You're making too much of this."Female 1: "That boy's not worth killing yourself over."Female 3: "It's not going to solve anything."Male 1: "You're just trying to get attention."Male 2: "You're not going to kill yourself."Male 3: What you do say isFemale 2: "I'm sorry you're feeling so bad."Female 1: "How can I help?"Female 3: "We'll get through this together."Male 1: "Let's keep you safe."Male 2: A lot of people think about killing themselves, adults and kids.Male 3: Most of them never tried but some of them do, so if your kid says,Female 2: "I'd be better off dead."Female 3: "I can't live with this."Male 3: "I'm gonna kill myself."Male 2: take her seriously. Find someone she can talk to about it. Someone who knows how to help.Female 2: Sometimes kids want to kill themselves because something happened--a breakup, a failure,Female 1: but sometimes it goes deeper and it's not going to go away by itself.Female 3: Get some help. Talk to your doctor,Male 2: or a counselor at school,Male 1: or your minister,Male 3: but don't just let it drop,Female 1: and make sure that your kid always has someone to turn to. Someone he trusts.Female 3: Make a list together. Write down three, four, five namesMale 1: and put a suicide hotline number on there, too.Male 3: Have him keep that list in his wallet so he always knows where to turn.Female 3: Make sure your home is safe.Female 2: If you have pills she could use to hurt herself, lock them up.Male 2: If you have a gun, don't just lock it up. Get it out of the house, the bullets too.Male 1: And one more thing, if you think your kid might be about to hurt himself, don't leave him alone.Female 1: Take him to the emergency room.Male 3: Call 9-1-1 if you have to.Male 1: We all have our ups and downs but sometimes it's more than that.Female 3: If you think something's wrong, the only way to find out is to ask.Female 2: Ask straight-out, "Are you thinking about killing yourself?"Male 2: Don't wait until you're sure. Trust your gut.Male 3: Because it never hurts to askFemale 1: and it can make a big difference,Female 2: all the differenceFemale 3: in your kid's life.[Music playing][Woman singing][Song lyrics]I know what it feels like to say I'm so cold. One without the other. Lost in that hole. Don't think you are all alone. You have somewhere to go. This ain't a one-person show. Let someone out there lend you a hand. Don't go through this alone.Reach Out. Give someone a chance to help even when you are falling down, down, down. Your whole life will turn around. Reach out to somebody. Give your hand to somebody. Life is in the palm of their hands.Reach Out. Give someone a chance to help even when you are falling down, down, down. Your whole life will turn around. Reach out to somebody. Give your hand to somebody. Life is in the palm of their hands. Reach out to them. Reach out to them. Reach out to them.[Music playing]Suicidal thoughts and attempted suicide take an emotional toll. For instance, you may be so consumed by suicidal thoughts that you can't function in your daily life. And while many attempted suicides are impulsive acts during a moment of crisis, they can leave you with permanent serious or severe injuries, such as organ failure or brain damage.For those left behind after a suicide — people known as survivors of suicide — grief, anger, depression and guilt are common.To help keep yourself from feeling suicidal:Suicide and suicidal thoughts care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Female 1:Male 1:Female 2:Male 2:Male 3:Female 3:Male 1:Female 2:Female 1:Male 3:Female 2:Male 2:Female 3:Male 1:Female 1:Female 3:Male 2:Male 3:Female 3:Male 1:Female 1:Male 2:Female 2:Male 3:Female 3:Male 1:Female 2:Female 1:Male 3:Male 2:Female 2:Male 3:Female 1:Female 3:Male 1:Female 2:Male 2:Female 3:don'tMale 3:Female 2:Male 3:Female 1:Female 3:Male 1:Male 2:Male 3:doFemale 2:Female 1:Female 3:Male 1:Male 2:Male 3:Female 2:Female 3:Male 3:Male 2:Female 2:Female 1:Female 3:Male 2:Male 1:Male 3:Female 1:Female 3:Male 1:Male 3:Female 3:Female 2:Male 2:Male 1:Female 1:Male 3:Male 1:Female 3:Female 2:Male 2:Male 3:Female 1:Female 2:Female 3:[Music playing][Woman singing][Song lyrics][Music playing]Get the treatment you need.Establish your support network.Remember, suicidal feelings are temporary.Advertising & Sponsorship