Cerebrospinal fluid usually flows around the outside of the brain and spinal cord. In people with syringomyelia, cerebrospinal fluid collects inside the spinal cord and forms a fluid-filled cyst. The cyst is sometimes called a syrinx.Syringomyelia (sih-ring-go-my-E-lee-uh) is the development of a fluid-filled cyst within the spinal cord. The cyst, which is sometimes called a syrinx, can grow larger over time. When it does, it can damage the spinal cord and cause pain, weakness and stiffness.Syringomyelia has several possible causes. Many cases are associated with a Chiari malformation. This is a condition in which brain tissue pushes into the spinal canal.Other causes of syringomyelia include spinal cord tumors, spinal cord injuries and damage caused by swelling around the spinal cord.If syringomyelia doesn't cause problems, monitoring the condition might be all that's necessary. But if the symptoms are bothersome, surgery might be needed.Syringomyelia symptoms usually develop slowly over time. If syringomyelia is caused by brain tissue pushing into the spinal canal, it is called a Chiari malformation. Symptoms generally begin between ages 25 and 40.In some cases, coughing or straining can trigger symptoms of syringomyelia, although neither causes syringomyelia.Syringomyelia might affect the back, shoulders, arms or legs. Symptoms can include:If you have any of the symptoms associated with syringomyelia, see your healthcare professional.If you've had a spinal cord injury, watch for symptoms of syringomyelia. It may take months to years after an injury before syringomyelia develops. Make sure your healthcare professional knows you had a spinal cord injury.It's not clear how and why syringomyelia happens. When it develops, the fluid that surrounds, cushions and protects the brain and spinal cord collects within the spinal cord itself. This fluid is called cerebrospinal fluid. If it collects and forms a fluid-filled cyst, it is called a syrinx.Several conditions and diseases can lead to syringomyelia, including:In some people, syringomyelia can progress and lead to serious complications. Other people have no symptoms.A syrinx can cause complications if it grows or damages nerves within the spinal cord. Complications include:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship