A tension-type headache causes mild to moderate pain that's often described as feeling like a tight band around the head. A tension-type headache is the most common type of headache, yet its causes aren't well understood. Treatments are available. Managing a tension-type headache is often a balance between practicing healthy habits, finding effective nonmedicine treatments and using medicines appropriately.Symptoms of a tension-type headache include: Tension-type headaches are divided into two main categories — episodic and chronic.Episodic tension-type headaches can last from 30 minutes to a week. Frequent episodic tension-type headaches occur less than 15 days a month for at least three months. This type of headache can become chronic.This type of tension-type headache lasts hours and may be constant. Chronic tension-type headaches occur 15 or more days a month for at least three months.Tension-type headaches can be hard to tell apart from migraines. And if you have frequent episodic tension-type headaches, you also can have migraines.But unlike some forms of migraine, tension-type headaches usually aren't associated with visual disturbances such as seeing bright spots or flashes of light. People with tension-type headaches also don't usually experience nausea or vomiting with head pain. While physical activity tends to make migraine pain worse, it doesn't affect tension-type headache pain. Sometimes a tension-type headache occurs with sensitivity to light or sound, but this symptom isn't common. See your health care professional if you need to take medicine for tension-type headaches more than twice a week. Also make an appointment if tension-type headaches disrupt your life.Even if you have a history of headaches, see your health care professional if the headache pattern changes. Also see your care professional if your headaches suddenly feel different. Occasionally, headaches may be caused by a serious medical condition. These can include a brain tumor or rupture of a weakened blood vessel, known as an aneurysm.Get emergency care if you have any of these symptoms:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe cause of tension-type headaches is not known. In the past, experts thought tension-type headaches were caused by muscle contractions in the face, neck and scalp. They thought the muscle contractions were a result of emotions, tension or stress. But research suggests that muscle contraction isn't the cause.The most common theory is that people who have tension-type headaches have increased sensitivity to pain. Muscle tenderness, a common symptom of tension-type headaches, may result from this sensitized pain system.Stress is the most commonly reported trigger for tension-type headaches.Most people experience a tension-type headache at some point in their lives. However, some research has found that women are more likely to have frequent episodic tension-type headaches and chronic tension-type headaches. Age also might play a factor. One study found that episodic tension-type headaches were more likely to affect people in their 40s.Because tension-type headaches are so common, they can have an effect on job productivity and quality of life, particularly if they're chronic. Frequent headache pain may make it hard to attend activities. You might need to stay home from work. If you do go to your job, it may be hard to function as usual.Regular exercise can help prevent tension-type headaches. Other techniques also can help, such as:Using medicines along with stress management may be more effective than any one treatment in reducing your tension-type headaches.Also, living a healthy lifestyle may help prevent headaches:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Biofeedback training.Cognitive behavioral therapy.Other relaxation techniques.Advertising & Sponsorship