Tetralogy of Fallot is a combination of four heart changes present at birth. There is a hole in the heart called a ventricular septal defect. There also is a narrowing of the pulmonary valve or other area along the pathway between the heart and lungs. Narrowing of the pulmonary valve is called pulmonary stenosis. The body's main artery, called the aorta, is misplaced. The lower right heart chamber wall is thickened, a condition called right ventricular hypertrophy. Tetralogy of Fallot changes how blood flows through the heart and to the rest of the body.Tetralogy of Fallot (teh-TRAL-uh-jee of fuh-LOW) is a rare heart condition that is present at birth. That means it's a congenital heart defect. A baby born with the condition has four different heart problems.These heart problems affect the structure of the heart. The condition causes altered blood flow through the heart and to the rest of the body. Babies with tetralogy of Fallot often have blue or gray skin color due to low oxygen levels.Tetralogy of Fallot is usually diagnosed during pregnancy or soon after a baby is born. If the heart changes and symptoms are mild, tetralogy of Fallot may not be noticed or diagnosed until adulthood.People who are diagnosed with tetralogy of Fallot need surgery to fix the heart. They will need regular health checkups for life.Joseph Dearani, M.D., Chair, Cardiovascular Surgery, Mayo Clinic: My name is Joseph Dearani, and I'm the chair of Cardiovascular Surgery at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, and my area of expertise is in pediatric and congenital heart disease. Today we are going to talk about tetralogy of Fallot, which is one of the most common congenital heart defects. In many ways, this lesion is viewed as the benchmark against which other treatment strategies for congenital heart defects are compared. There is no other lesion that offers the breadth of treatment history, and modifications to further improve results, that continue to the present day.The optimum treatment approach remains controversial, but in general, complete repair is advised in the first three to six months of life. Importantly, the application of the modified Blalock–Taussig shunt as a palliative procedure is performed much less commonly in the current era. The surgical goal is complete repair, which consists of ventricular septal defect closure and relief of right ventricular outflow tract obstruction, which is ideally performed with preservation of pulmonary valve function. The most common congenital heart operation performed in adulthood is pulmonary valve replacement following tetralogy of Fallot repair in infancy or childhood.There are two standard approaches for complete repair. The first is the transatrial-transpulmonary approach and the second is the transventricular approach. The transatrial-transpulmonary approach has the distinct advantage of preserving pulmonary valve function but may be better approached, and a little bit easier, beyond four months of age. Selective use of a small infundibular incision may be helpful to completely relieve right ventricular outflow tract obstruction and/or improve visualization of the ventricular septal defect in some situations. A concerted effort is made to stay below the pulmonary annulus, and preserve the pulmonary valve when this is performed, particularly if the size of the pulmonary valve annulus is acceptable, thus requiring pulmonary valvotomy alone. The transventricular approach can be applied at any age. While it has stood the test of time, we have learned that many patients ultimately require pulmonary valve replacement later on in life because of pulmonary regurgitation. Consequently, if the transventricular approach is being applied, extensive transannular patching is avoided in order to minimize late right ventricular dilatation and right ventricular dysfunction, severe pulmonary regurgitation, and avoiding ventricular arrhythmias. While it is important to adequately relieve right ventricular outflow tract obstruction, leaving some residual obstruction behind is considered acceptable, particularly if preservation and function of the pulmonary valvecan be maintained. In general, a residual gradient of 20 to 30 millimeters of mercury across the pulmonary valve is usually well tolerated and permissible.The presence of an anomalous left anterior descending coronary artery is usually not a contraindication to complete repair in the current era. A short transannular incision can be performed that avoids the anomalous left anterior descending coronary artery and can be utilized to further relieve right ventricular outflow tract obstruction, if needed. The decision to close the patent foramen ovale is largely determined by patient age and whether a transannular repair was applied. In general, the patent foramen ovale is left open when complete repair is performed in the neonate or when a transannular repair has been performed and severe pulmonary regurgitation is present. The application of a monocusp repair to improve competence of the pulmonary valve can be helpful in this situation and can smooth out the early post-operative period.In the modern era, repair of tetrology of Fallot can be performed with very low mortality, in the neighborhood of 1%, and the late survival and quality of life are excellent for the majority of patients. In general, children attend school and can participate in most childhood sport activities without restrictions. Early repair in the first six months of life is the rule, and preservation of the pulmonary valve and minimizing pulmonary regurgitation is the goal. The need for diligent lifelong surveillance cannot be overemphasized, so that proper timing of any potential subsequent interventions can be optimized.Mayo Clinic has a long-standing history in the surgical care of tetrology of Fallot since the earliest days of cardiac surgery in the mid 1950s. The number of patients in our practice that have undergone complete repair, or palliative procedures, or re-operations later on in life, in childhood and adulthood, with tetrology of Fallot are now in the thousands. Thank you very much for listening on tetrology of Fallot.Tetralogy of Fallot symptoms depend on how much blood flow is blocked from leaving the heart to go to the lungs. Symptoms may include:Some babies with tetralogy of Fallot suddenly develop deep blue or gray skin, nails, and lips. This usually happens when the baby cries, eats or is upset. These episodes are called tet spells.Tet spells are caused by a rapid drop in the amount of oxygen in the blood. They are most common in young infants, around 2 to 4 months old. Tet spells may be less noticeable in toddlers and older children. That's because they typically squat when they're short of breath. Squatting sends more blood to the lungs.Serious congenital heart defects are often diagnosed before or soon after your child is born. Seek medical help if you notice that your baby has these symptoms:If your baby becomes blue or gray, place your baby on the side and pull the baby's knees up to the chest. This helps increase blood flow to the lungs. Call 911 or your local emergency number immediately.Tetralogy of Fallot occurs as the baby's heart grows during pregnancy. Usually, the cause is unknown.Tetralogy of Fallot includes four problems with heart structure:Some people with tetralogy of Fallot have other problems that affect the aorta or heart arteries. There also may be a hole between the heart's upper chambers, called atrial septal defect.The exact cause of tetralogy of Fallot is unknown. Some things may increase the risk of a baby being born with tetralogy of Fallot. Risk factors include:Untreated tetralogy of Fallot usually leads to life-threatening complications. The complications may cause disability or death by early adulthood.A possible complication of tetralogy of Fallot is infection of the inner lining of the heart or heart valves. This is called infective endocarditis. Sometimes antibiotics are given before dental work to prevent this type of infection. Ask your healthcare team if preventive antibiotics are right for you or your baby.Complications also are possible after surgery to repair tetralogy of Fallot. But most people do well after such surgery. When complications occur, they may include:Another procedure or surgery may be needed to fix these complications.People born with a complex congenital heart defect may be at risk for complications during pregnancy. Talk to your healthcare team about the possible risks and complications of pregnancy. Together you can discuss and plan for any special care needed.Because the exact cause of most congenital heart defects is unknown, it may not be possible to prevent these conditions. If you have a high risk of giving birth to a child with a congenital heart defect, genetic testing and screening may be done during pregnancy.There are some steps you can take to help reduce your child's overall risk of birth defects, such as:Tetralogy of Fallot care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart & Blood Health support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.346 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 58 Replies Thu, Jun 20, 2024 106 Replies Wed, Jun 19, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Joseph Dearani, M.D., Chair, Cardiovascular Surgery, Mayo Clinic:Narrowing of the valve between the heart and the lungs, called pulmonary valve stenosis.A hole between the bottom heart chambers, called a ventricular septal defect.Shifting of the body's main artery.Thickening of the right lower chamber of the heart, called right ventricular hypertrophy.Get proper prenatal care.Take a multivitamin with folic acid.Don't drink or smoke.Get a rubella (German measles) vaccine.Control blood sugar.Manage chronic health conditions.Avoid harmful substances.Check with your healthcare team before taking any medications.Advertising & Sponsorship