Thrombophlebitis is a condition that causes a blood clot to form and block one or more veins, often in the legs. In superficial thrombophlebitis, the vein is near the surface of the skin. In deep vein thrombosis or DVT, the vein is deep within a muscle. DVT increases the risk of serious health problems. Both types of thrombophlebitis can be treated with blood-thinning medications.Thrombophlebitis (throm-boe-fluh-BY-tis) is an inflammatory process that causes a blood clot to form and block one or more veins, usually in the legs. The affected vein might be near the surface of the skin (superficial thrombophlebitis) or deep within a muscle (deep vein thrombosis, or DVT). A blood clot in a leg vein may cause pain, warmth and tenderness in the affected area. Causes of thrombophlebitis include trauma, surgery or prolonged inactivity.Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) increases the risk of serious health problems. It's usually treated with blood-thinning medications. Superficial thrombophlebitis is sometimes treated with blood-thinning medications, too.Symptoms of superficial thrombophlebitis include warmth, tenderness, and pain. You might have redness and swelling and see a red, hard cord just under the surface of your skin that's tender to the touch. Symptoms of deep vein thrombosis include swelling, tenderness, and pain in your leg.Superficial thrombophlebitis signs and symptoms include:Deep vein thrombosis signs and symptoms include:When a vein close to the surface of the skin is affected, you might see a red, hard cord just under the surface of the skin that's tender to the touch. When a deep vein in the leg is affected, the leg may become swollen, tender and painful. See your doctor right away if you have a red, swollen or tender vein — especially if you have one or more risk factors for thrombophlebitis.Call 911 or your local emergency number if:Have someone take you to your doctor or emergency room, if possible. It might be difficult for you to drive, and it's helpful to have someone with you to help you remember the information you receive.Thrombophlebitis is caused by a blood clot. A blood clot can form because of an injury to a vein or from having an inherited disorder that affects how your blood clots. You may also get a blood clot after not being active for long periods of time, like during a hospital stay or recovery from an injury.The cause of thrombophlebitis is a blood clot, which can form in your blood as a result of:Your risk of thrombophlebitis is higher if you're not active for a long period or you have a catheter in a central vein to treat a condition. Having varicose veins or a pacemaker can also increase your risk. Women who are pregnant, have just given birth, or take birth control pills or hormone replacement therapy may also be at higher risk. Other risk factors include a family history of a blood-clotting disorder, a tendency to form blood clots, and having thrombophlebitis before. Your risk may also be higher if you've had a stroke, you're over age 60, or you're overweight. Having cancer and smoking are also risk factors.Your risk of thrombophlebitis might increase if you:If you have one or more risk factors, discuss prevention strategies with your doctor before taking long flights or road trips or if you're planning to have elective surgery, recovery from which will require you not to move much.Complications from superficial thrombophlebitis are rare. However, if you develop deep vein thrombosis (DVT), the risk of serious complications increases. Complications might include: A pulmonary embolism (PE) occurs when a blood clot gets stuck in an artery in the lung, blocking blood flow to part of the lung. Blood clots most often start in the legs and travel up through the right side of the heart and into the lungs. This is called deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Sitting during a long flight or car ride can cause your ankles and calves to swell and increases your risk of thrombophlebitis. To help prevent a blood clot:Sep 06, 2023CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.