Thyroid nodules are solid or fluid-filled lumps that form within your thyroid, a small gland located at the base of your neck, just above your breastbone. The thyroid gland is located at the base of the neck, just below the Adam's apple. Most thyroid nodules aren't serious and don't cause symptoms. Only a small percentage of thyroid nodules are cancerous.You often won't know you have a thyroid nodule until your doctor discovers it during a routine medical exam. Or your doctor may uncover it during a scan that was done for another health reason. Some thyroid nodules, however, may become large enough to be visible or make it difficult to swallow or breathe.Treatment options depend on the type of thyroid nodule you have.Most thyroid nodules don't cause signs or symptoms. But occasionally some nodules become so large that they can:In some cases, thyroid nodules produce additional thyroxine, a hormone secreted by your thyroid gland. The extra thyroxine can cause symptoms of an overproduction of thyroid hormones (hyperthyroidism), such as:Only a small number of thyroid nodules are cancerous. But determining which nodules are cancerous can't be done by evaluating your symptoms alone. Most cancerous thyroid nodules are slow growing and may be small when your doctor discovers them. Aggressive thyroid cancers are rare with nodules that may be large, firm, fixed and rapid growing.Although most thyroid nodules are noncancerous and don't cause problems, ask your doctor to evaluate any unusual swelling in your neck, especially if you have trouble breathing or swallowing. It's important to evaluate the possibility of cancer.Seek medical care if you develop signs and symptoms of hyperthyroidism, such as:Also see your doctor if you have signs and symptoms that may mean your thyroid gland isn't making enough thyroid hormone (hypothyroidism), which include:Several conditions can cause nodules to develop in your thyroid gland, including:Overgrowth of normal thyroid tissue. An overgrowth of normal thyroid tissue is sometimes referred to as a thyroid adenoma. It's unclear why this occurs, but it's not cancerous and isn't considered serious unless it causes bothersome symptoms from its size.Some thyroid adenomas lead to hyperthyroidism.Thyroid cancer. The chances that a nodule is cancerous are small. However, a nodule that is large and hard or causes pain or discomfort is more worrisome. You will likely want to have it checked by your doctor.Certain factors increase your risk of thyroid cancer, such as a family history of thyroid or other endocrine cancers and having a history of radiation exposure from medical therapy or from nuclear fallout. Enlargement of the thyroid can expand the gland well beyond its typical size and cause a noticeable bulge in the neck. This can be caused by single or multiple nodules (lumps) in the thyroid or by an autoimmune process. Complications associated with some thyroid nodules include:Hyperthyroidism. Problems can occur when a nodule or goiter produces thyroid hormone, leading to an excess amount of the hormone in the body. Hyperthyroidism can result in weight loss, muscle weakness, heat intolerance, and anxiousness or irritability.Potential complications of hyperthyroidism include an irregular heartbeat, weak bones and thyrotoxic crisis, a rare but potentially life-threatening intensification of signs and symptoms that requires immediate medical care.Feb 11, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.