Tongue-tie (ankyloglossia) is a condition in which an unusually short, thick or tight band of tissue (lingual frenulum) tethers the bottom of the tongue's tip to the floor of the mouth. If necessary, tongue-tie can be treated with a surgical cut to release the frenulum (frenotomy). If additional repair is needed or the lingual frenulum is too thick for a frenotomy, a more extensive procedure known as a frenuloplasty might be an option.Tongue-tie (ankyloglossia) is a condition present at birth that restricts the tongue's range of motion.With tongue-tie, an unusually short, thick or tight band of tissue (lingual frenulum) tethers the bottom of the tongue's tip to the floor of the mouth, so it may interfere with breast-feeding. Someone who has tongue-tie might have difficulty sticking out his or her tongue. Tongue-tie can also affect the way a child eats, speaks and swallows.Sometimes tongue-tie may not cause problems. Some cases may require a simple surgical procedure for correction.Signs and symptoms of tongue-tie include:See a doctor if:Typically, the lingual frenulum separates before birth, allowing the tongue free range of motion. With tongue-tie, the lingual frenulum remains attached to the bottom of the tongue. Why this happens is largely unknown, although some cases of tongue-tie have been associated with certain genetic factors. Although tongue-tie can affect anyone, it's more common in boys than girls. Tongue-tie sometimes runs in families.Tongue-tie can affect a baby's oral development, as well as the way he or she eats, speaks and swallows.For example, tongue-tie can lead to:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Breast-feeding problems.Speech difficulties.Poor oral hygiene.Challenges with other oral activities.Advertising & Sponsorship