Definition and Characteristics: Benzalkonium chloride dissolves well in ethanol and acetone. The solution has a pH of 6.5~8, and the color is colorless or pale yellow. Overseas Regulatory Status: Used for disinfecting the skin or scalp as a primary purpose, applying to human skin or scalp, surfaces, materials, equipment not directly in contact with food or feed, especially for disinfection purposes, including swimming pools, aquariums, baths, and other water applications. Used for disinfection of air, surfaces, materials, equipment in hospitals, chemicals, toilets, wastewater, hospital waste, and soil. Also used as a bird repellent for treatment and restoration of swimming pools, aquariums, and other water bodies and construction materials. Produced for the purpose of producing materials with germicidal properties on fabrics, tissues, masks, paints, and other products or materials. Used for disinfectants, disinfectant soaps, oral or body hygiene products, or animal hygiene purposes such as antibacterial functions. Used to disinfect materials and surfaces related to breeding or transporting animals. Used for disinfection of equipment, containers, consumables, surfaces, or piping related to the production, transportation, storage, or consumption of food or feed for humans and animals, including drinking water. Used to preserve wood, control insects, control organisms including insects, and transform wood to preserve wooden products. Also used to control microorganisms and algae attacks and to preserve materials other than stone, composite materials, or wood. Used for the control of harmful organisms such as microorganisms, algae, and mussels to preserve water or other liquids used in cooling and processing systems. Used for industrial processes such as wood and paper pulp, oil extraction, materials, equipment, and structures to prevent slime growth, such as porous sandstone layers. Kim Jiwon, Jo Kyungyi, Kim Hana, & Park Dongwook. (2021). A review on the uses and health hazards of benzalkonium chloride disinfectant - focusing on humidifier disinfectants. Journal of Korean Society of Environmental Health, 47(6), 513-520. Regulation (EU) 528/2012 and Decision (EU) 2016/1950 Regulation (EC) No.1223/2009 South Korea Regulatory Status: Harmful to the human body if disinfectants remain when used on porous objects such as carpets and bedding. Separate standards are set for the usage of benzalkonium chloride as a detergent, removing agent, gloss coating agent, rust inhibitor, lubricant, adhesive, air freshener, deodorizer, etc. Safety Confirmation Target Living Chemical Products Designation and Safety/Labeling Standards [MOE Notification No. 2022-19] Summary Table of Classification and Precautions for Disinfectants and Germicides.