Stretch marks (striae) are indented streaks that appear on the abdomen, breasts, hips, buttocks or other places on the body. They're common in pregnant women, especially during the last trimester. Stretch marks aren't painful or harmful, but some people don't like the way they make their skin look.Stretch marks don't require treatment. They often fade over time, with or without treatment. They may never disappear completely. Some people are prone to develop stretch marks on the upper arms, abdomen, buttocks and thighs. New stretch marks are bright pink, red, blue, black or purple. Older stretch marks fade. Stretch marks don't all look alike. They vary depending on how long you've had them, what caused them, where they are on your body and the type of skin you have. Common variations include: Stretch marks are common in pregnancy, especially during the last trimester. They often fade but don't usually disappear. Stretch marks can cover large areas of the body, but it happens rarely. This can result from corticosteroid medicine use or a disease such as Cushing syndrome. See your health care provider if you're concerned about the appearance of your skin or if the stretch marks cover large areas of your body. Your health care provider can help determine the cause of the stretch marks and discuss treatment options.The cause of stretch marks is stretching of the skin. Their severity is affected by several factors, including your genetics and the degree of stress on the skin. Your level of the hormone cortisol also might play a role. Cortisol is a hormone produced by the adrenal glands. It weakens elastic fibers in the skin.Anyone can develop stretch marks, but some factors increase your likelihood of getting them, including:Jan 12, 2023CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.