Sun allergy is a broad term. It describes several conditions that cause an itchy rash to form on the skin after being in sunlight or other sources of ultraviolet (UV) radiation. Polymorphous light eruption is the most common form of sun allergy.Some people have a hereditary type of sun allergy. Others develop symptoms only when triggered by another factor — such as taking medication or touching certain plants. Other types of sun-related reactions occur for reasons that are unclear.Mild sun allergy may clear up without treatment. Severe rashes may be treated with steroid creams or pills. If you have severe sun allergy, you may need to take preventive steps. For example, wear clothing that shields you from the sun.Polymorphous light eruption is a rash that affects parts of the body that are exposed to more sunlight as daylight hours get longer, such as the front of the neck and chest. Polymorphous means that the rash can have many forms, such as tiny bumps, raised areas or blisters.How skin with sun allergy looks varies widely depending on the color of your skin and what's causing the symptoms. Signs and symptoms may include:Symptoms usually occur only on skin that has been exposed to the sun or other source of UV light. Symptoms show up within minutes to hours after sun exposure.See a health care provider if you have unusual, bothersome skin reactions after being in the sun. For severe or persistent symptoms, you may need to see someone who specializes in diagnosing and treating skin disorders (dermatologist).Causes of sun allergy include immune system reactions to sunlight, certain medications and chemicals that make the skin more sensitive to the sun. It isn't clear why some people have a sun allergy and others don't. Inherited traits may play a role.Risk factors for having an allergic reaction to sunlight include:If you have a sun allergy or an increased sensitivity to the sun, you can help prevent a reaction by taking these steps:Apply sunscreen. Use a water-resistant, broad-spectrum sunscreen with an SPF of at least 30, even on cloudy days. Apply sunscreen generously, and reapply every two hours — or more often if you're swimming or perspiring.If you're using a product that contains physical blockers (titanium dioxide, zinc oxide), apply it over any other products you're wearing — except insect repellent. Insect repellent goes on last. Physical blockers provide the most effective protection for sensitive skin.The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) requires all sunscreen to retain its original strength for at least three years. Check sunscreen labels for directions on storing and expiration dates. Throw away sunscreen if it's expired or more than 3 years old.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Contact with certain substances.Taking certain medications.Having another skin condition.Having a blood relative with a sun allergy.Avoid sun exposure between 10 a.m. and 4 p.m.Avoid sudden exposure to lots of sunlight.Wear sunglasses and protective clothing.Apply sunscreen.Avoid known triggers.Apply UV-blocking window film.Advertising & Sponsorship