Supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) is a type of irregular heartbeat, also called an arrhythmia. It's a very fast or erratic heartbeat that affects the heart's upper chambers. SVT also is called paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia.The typical heart beats about 60 to 100 times a minute. During SVT, the heart beats about 150 to 220 times a minute. Occasionally it beats faster or slower.Most people with supraventricular tachycardia don't need treatment. When recommended, treatment may include specific actions or movements, medicines, a heart procedure, or a device to control the heartbeat.Supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) falls into three main groups:Other types of supraventricular tachycardia include:The main symptom of supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) is a very fast heartbeat that may last for a few minutes to a few days. The heart beats 100 or more times a minute. Usually during SVT, the heart beats 150 to 220 times a minute. The fast heartbeat may come and go suddenly.Symptoms of supraventricular tachycardia may include:Some people with SVT do not notice symptoms.In infants and very young children, symptoms of SVT may be vague. The symptoms can include sweating, poor feeding, a change in skin color and a rapid pulse. If your infant or young child has any of these symptoms, talk with a healthcare professional.Supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) is usually not life-threatening unless you have heart damage or another heart condition. But if SVT is severe, the irregular heartbeat may cause all heart activity to suddenly stop. This is called sudden cardiac arrest.Call a healthcare professional if you have a very fast heartbeat for the first time or if an irregular heartbeat lasts longer than a few seconds.Symptoms of SVT may be related to a serious health condition. Call 911 or your local emergency number if you have a very fast heartbeat that lasts for more than a few minutes or if a fast heartbeat occurs with these symptoms:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesSupraventricular tachycardia (SVT) is caused by faulty signaling in the heart. Electrical signals in the heart control the heartbeat.In SVT, a change in heart signaling causes the heartbeat to start too early in the heart's upper chambers. When this happens, the heartbeat speeds up. The heart can't fill with blood properly. Symptoms such as lightheadedness or dizziness can occur.In a typical heart rhythm, a tiny cluster of cells at the sinus node sends out an electrical signal. The signal then travels through the atria to the atrioventricular (AV) node and then passes into the ventricles, causing them to contract and pump out blood.Supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) is an irregularly fast or erratic heartbeat. It occurs when faulty electrical signaling in the heart set off a series of early beats in the upper chambers of the heart.To understand the cause of supraventricular tachycardia (SVT), it might help to know how the heart usually works.The heart has four chambers:Inside the upper right heart chamber is a group of cells called the sinus node. The sinus node makes the signals that start each heartbeat.The signals move across the upper heart chambers. Then the signals arrive at a group of cells called the AV node, where they usually slow down. The signals then go to the lower heart chambers.In a healthy heart, this heart signaling process usually goes smoothly. The heart usually beats about 60 to 100 times a minute at rest. But in SVT, the heart beats faster than 100 beats a minute. The heart may beat 150 to 220 times a minute.Supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) is the most common type of arrhythmia in infants and children. It also tends to occur more often in women, particularly during pregnancy.Health conditions or treatments that may increase the risk of supraventricular tachycardia include:Other things that may increase the risk of SVT include:When the heart beats too fast, it may not send enough blood to the body. As a result, the organs and tissues may not get enough oxygen.Over time, untreated and frequent attacks of supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) may weaken the heart and lead to heart failure. This is especially true in people who also have other medical conditions.A severe attack of SVT may cause fainting or a sudden loss of all heart activity, called sudden cardiac arrest.The same lifestyle changes used to manage supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) also may help prevent it. Try these tips.Supraventricular tachycardia care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart Rhythm Conditions support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.414 Replies Tue, May 28, 2024 93 Replies Thu, May 23, 2024 28 Replies Sat, May 04, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia (AVNRT).Atrioventricular reciprocating tachycardia (AVRT).Atrial tachycardia.Follow a heart-healthy lifestyle.Don't use a lot of caffeine.Keep a notebook or diary of when symptoms happen.Use medicines carefully.Advertising & Sponsorship