A breast lump is a growth of tissue that forms in the breast. Most breast lumps are not irregular or cancerous. But it's key to have your healthcare professional check them promptly.Breast tissue typically might feel lumpy or ropy. You also may have breast tenderness that comes and goes with your menstrual period.If you have a health problem that affects your breasts, you might notice changes in how your breasts usually feel. These changes can include:Make an appointment to have a breast lump checked, especially if:Breast lumps can be caused by:See your healthcare professional to learn what kinds of tests you might need and which type of breast lump you have.Risk factors for breast lumps caused by conditions that are not cancer include the following:Some risk factors for breast cancer are within your control to change. These include:Other risk factors for cancerous breast lumps can't be controlled. These include:Some conditions that cause breast lumps may lead to other health concerns, also called complications. The complications depend on the type of breast lump that you have. For example, without treatment, some breast infections can cause pockets of pus to form in the breast.Other breast conditions that are not cancer still can raise the risk of breast cancer later on. These include conditions that can cause lumps, such as atypical ductal hyperplasia, atypical lobular hyperplasia and lobular carcinoma in situ. If you have a breast condition that raises the risk of cancer, it doesn't mean that you'll definitely get breast cancer. Ask your healthcare professional what the risk means for you and whether you can make lifestyle changes to lower it.Some breast lumps don't cause complications. For example, small cysts and simple fibroadenomas sometimes go away on their own over time.There's no clear way to prevent many breast lumps. Breast lumps that are not cancer often are linked with natural changes in the body, such as hormonal changes over time.But some risk factors for cancerous breast lumps are within your power to change. Take the following steps to lower your chances of breast cancer:Suspicious breast lumps care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Breast Cancer support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.189 Replies Tue, Jun 25, 2024 83 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 14 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Breast cysts.Fibrocystic breast changes.Fibroadenomas.Injury or post-surgery.Infections.Intraductal papilloma.Lipoma.Breast cancer.Age.Menstrual periods.Pregnancy.Premenopause.Alcohol.Overweight or obesity.A lack of exercise.Not giving birth.Not breastfeeding.Hormonal birth control.Hormone therapy.Being born female.Aging.Gene changes.Family history of breast cancer.Dense breasts.Early menstrual periods or later menopause.Certain breast conditions that aren't cancer.Drink less alcohol.Eat a balanced diet.Exercise.Advertising & Sponsorship