In tachycardia, an irregular electrical signal, called an impulse, starts in the upper or lower chambers of the heart. This causes the heart to beat faster.Tachycardia (tak-ih-KAHR-dee-uh) is the medical term for a heart rate over 100 beats a minute. Many types of irregular heart rhythms, called arrhythmias, can cause tachycardia.A fast heart rate isn't always a concern. For instance, the heart rate usually rises during exercise or as a response to stress.Tachycardia may not cause any symptoms or complications. But sometimes it's a warning of a medical condition that needs attention. Some forms of tachycardia can lead to serious health problems if left untreated. Such problems may include heart failure, stroke or sudden cardiac death.Treatment for tachycardia may include specific actions or movements, medicine, cardioversion, or surgery to control a rapid heartbeat.There are many different types of tachycardia. Sinus tachycardia refers to a usual increase in the heart rate often caused by exercise or stress.Other types of tachycardia are grouped according to cause and the part of the heart causing the fast heart rate. Common types of tachycardia caused by irregular heart rhythms include:Mayo Clinic electrophysiologist Fred Kusumoto, M.D., explains what happens in the heart to create atrial fibrillation and what can be done to fix it.Jeff Olsen: This is a normal heartbeat. [HEART BEATING] Atrial fibrillation interrupts this regular beat.Fred Kusumoto, M.D., Cardiology, Mayo Clinic: In atrial fibrillation, instead of the atria squeezing in a normal regular fashion, the atria beat irregularly and chaotically.Jeff Olsen: Dr. Fred Kusumoto is an electrophysiologist at Mayo Clinic.Dr. Kusumoto: In some cases people feel their heart palpitating or beating very, very fast or a flip-flop in their heart or chest area. Other times, people just notice that they're more short of breath when they walk upstairs.Jeff Olsen: Dr. Kusumoto says atrial fibrillation decreases the heart's blood pumping efficiency and puts a patient at higher risk for blood clots, heart failure, and stroke. In some cases, atrial fibrillation can be corrected with medication or by administering a shock to a sedated patient's heart. In other instances, a procedure called catheter ablation may be used to scar tissue that's creating the erratic signals [HEART BEATING] in the hopes of getting back to that normal beat.Some people with tachycardia have no symptoms. The fast heartbeat may be discovered when a physical exam or heart tests are done for another reason.In general, tachycardia may cause these symptoms:Many things can cause tachycardia. If you feel like your heart is beating too fast, make an appointment for a health checkup.Seek immediate medical help if you have:A type of tachycardia called ventricular fibrillation is an emergency that requires immediate medical attention.During ventricular fibrillation, blood pressure drops dramatically. The person's breathing and pulse stop because the heart is not pumping any blood to the body. This also is called cardiac arrest. The person usually falls down, also called collapses.If this happens, do the following:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesTachycardia is an increased heart rate for any reason. If a fast heart rate is caused by exercise or stress, it's called sinus tachycardia. Sinus tachycardia is a symptom, not a condition.Most heart conditions can lead to different forms of tachycardia. Irregular heart rhythms, called arrhythmias, are one cause. An example of an irregular heart rhythm is atrial fibrillation (AFib).Other things that may lead to tachycardia include:Sometimes the exact cause of tachycardia is not known.In a typical heart rhythm, a tiny cluster of cells at the sinus node sends out an electrical signal. The signal then travels through the atria to the atrioventricular (AV) node and then passes into the ventricles, causing them to contract and pump out blood.To understand the cause of tachycardia, it may be helpful to know how the heart usually works.The heart has four chambers:Inside the upper right heart chamber is a group of cells called the sinus node. The sinus node makes the signals that start each heartbeat.The signals move across the upper heart chambers. Then the signals arrive at a group of cells called the AV node, where they usually slow down. The signals then go to the lower heart chambers.In a healthy heart, this signaling process usually goes smoothly. The resting heart rate is typically 60 to 100 beats a minute. But in tachycardia, something causes the heart to beat faster than 100 beats a minute.In general, things that may raise the risk of irregular heart rhythms that commonly cause tachycardia include:Lifestyle changes or treatment of heart conditions may lower the risk of tachycardia.When the heart beats too fast, it may not pump enough blood to the body. As a result, the organs and tissues may not get enough oxygen.Complications of tachycardia depend on:Potential complications of tachycardia may include:The best way to prevent tachycardia is to keep the heart healthy. Have regular health checkups. If you have heart disease, follow your treatment plan. Take all medicines as directed.Try these tips to prevent heart disease and keep the heart healthy:Talk to your healthcare team before using any medicines. Some cold and cough medicines have stimulants that may start a rapid heartbeat. Illegal drugs such as cocaine and methamphetamine are other stimulants that can cause changes in the heart's rhythm.Tachycardia care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart Rhythm Conditions support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.414 Replies Tue, May 28, 2024 93 Replies Thu, May 23, 2024 28 Replies Sat, May 04, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Atrial fibrillation, also called AFib.Atrial flutter.Ventricular tachycardia.Supraventricular tachycardia (SVT).Ventricular fibrillation.Jeff Olsen:Fred Kusumoto, M.D., Cardiology, Mayo Clinic:Jeff Olsen:Dr. Kusumoto:Jeff Olsen:Call 911 or the emergency numberStart CPR.If you're not trained in CPR or worried about giving rescue breaths, then provide hands-only CPR.Have someone get an automated external defibrillator (AED)Advertising & Sponsorship