Temporal lobe seizures begin in the temporal lobes of the brain. These areas process emotions and are important for short-term memory. Symptoms of a temporal lobe seizure may be related to these functions. Some people have odd feelings during the seizure, such as joy, deja vu or fear.Temporal lobe seizures are sometimes called focal seizures with impaired awareness. Some people remain aware of what's happening during the seizure. But if the seizure is more intense, the person might look awake but won't respond to what's around them. The person's lips and hands may make motions over and over.The cause of temporal lobe seizures is often not known. But it may stem from a scar in the temporal lobe. Temporal lobe seizures are treated with medicine. For some people who don't respond to medicine, surgery may be an option.An unusual sensation known as an aura may happen before a temporal lobe seizure. An aura acts as a warning. Not everyone who has temporal lobe seizures has auras. And not everyone who has auras remembers them.The aura is the first part of a focal seizure before a loss of consciousness. Examples of auras include:Sometimes temporal lobe seizures impair your ability to respond to others. This type of temporal lobe seizure usually lasts 30 seconds to 2 minutes.Symptoms of a temporal lobe seizure include:After a temporal lobe seizure, you may have:In extreme cases, what starts as a temporal lobe seizure evolves into a generalized tonic-clonic seizure. This type of seizure causes shaking, known as convulsions, and loss of consciousness. It also is called a grand mal seizure.Call 911 or your local emergency number if any of the following occurs:If you experience a seizure for the first time, see a health care provider.Seek medical advice if:Each side of your brain contains four lobes. The frontal lobe is important for cognitive functions and control of voluntary movement or activity. The parietal lobe processes information about temperature, taste, touch and movement, while the occipital lobe is primarily responsible for vision. The temporal lobe processes memories, integrating them with sensations of taste, sound, sight and touch.Often, the cause of temporal lobe seizures is not known. But they can be a result of a number of factors, including:During waking and sleeping, your brain cells produce varying electrical activity. If there's a burst of electrical activity in many brain cells, a seizure may occur.If this happens in just one area of the brain, the result is a focal seizure. A temporal lobe seizure is a focal seizure that originates in one of the temporal lobes.Over time, repeated temporal lobe seizures can cause the part of the brain that's responsible for learning and memory to shrink. This area of the brain is called the hippocampus. The loss of brain cells in the hippocampus may cause memory problems.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Seek medical adviceAdvertising & Sponsorship