[MUSIC PLAYING]All about Thoracic Outlet Syndrome (TOS): OverviewWhat is thoracic outlet syndrome (TOS)?Sam Farres, M.D., Chair, Division of Vascular Surgery Mayo Clinic in Florida: Thoracic outlet syndrome is a condition where irritation or compression of nerves and vessel can happen within the thoracic outlet. And the thoracic outlet is the space between the collar bone and the first rib. So when this irritation or compression happens, it causes different kinds of symptoms that can be nerve in nature or vessel-related in nature and that's what caused the thoracic outlet syndrome phenomenon.[MUSIC PLAYING]What does thoracic outlet syndrome (TOS) feel like? Dr. Farres: It varies from one person to the other person. It's a compression or irritation of nerves or vessels, and depends on which component is more compressed, can manifest in different presentation. If the nerve is compressed, it can manifest as pain or tingling, numbness. There is also other variation of that presentation. If a vessel is compressed – can be swelling, discoloration, coldness of the arms or the hand. Sometimes both component nerves and vessels can be compressed and when that happens, a variety of other symptoms can occur as well.[MUSIC PLAYING]Why does my collarbone hurt? Does thoracic outlet syndrome cause collarbone pain?Dr. Farres: In theory, yes, it can cause collarbone pain, but I would like to emphasize that more common conditions can cause that in more frequency. So we have to be careful not to attribute collarbone pain just to the thoracic outlet. When it comes to the thoracic outlet, if the nerve component within the space gets compressed or irritated – if that is very adjacent to the collar bone – that can also contribute to the pain.[MUSIC PLAYING]Thoracic outlet syndrome (TOS) is a group of conditions in which there's pressure on blood vessels or nerves in the area between the neck and shoulder. This space is known as the thoracic outlet. Compression of the blood vessels and nerves can cause shoulder and neck pain. It also can cause numbness in the fingers.Common causes of thoracic outlet syndrome include trauma from a car accident, repetitive injuries from a job or sport, and pregnancy. Differences in anatomy, such as having an extra or irregular rib, also can cause TOS. Sometimes the cause of thoracic outlet syndrome is not known.Treatment often involves physical therapy and pain relief. Most people improve with these treatments. For some, surgery may be recommended.The thoracic outlet is the space between the collarbone, known as the clavicle, and the first rib. This narrow passageway is crowded with blood vessels, nerves and muscles.There are three types of thoracic outlet syndrome:Thoracic outlet syndrome symptoms can vary depending on the type. When nerves are compressed, symptoms of neurogenic thoracic outlet syndrome include:Symptoms of venous thoracic outlet syndrome can include:Symptoms of arterial thoracic outlet syndrome can include:See your healthcare professional if you regularly experience any of the symptoms of thoracic outlet syndrome.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThoracic outlet syndrome is often caused by compression of the nerves or blood vessels in the thoracic outlet, the area between the neck and shoulder. The cause of the compression varies and can include:There are several factors that seem to increase the risk of thoracic outlet syndrome, including:Complications from this condition stem from the type of thoracic outlet syndrome. If you have swelling or a painful discoloration in the arm, it is important to seek urgent medical attention. You may need treatment for blood clots or an aneurysm.For neurogenic TOS, repetitive nerve compression can result in long-term injury resulting in chronic pain or disability. Neurogenic TOS can be confused for other joint or muscle injuries. If symptoms don't improve, it is important to seek medical attention for an evaluation and testing.If you're at risk of thoracic outlet compression, avoid repetitive movements and lifting heavy objects. If you're overweight, losing weight may help you prevent or relieve symptoms of thoracic outlet syndrome.Even if you don't have symptoms of thoracic outlet syndrome, avoid carrying heavy bags over your shoulder. This can increase pressure on the thoracic outlet. Stretch daily, and do exercises that keep your shoulder muscles strong and flexible.Daily stretches focusing on the chest, neck and shoulders can help improve shoulder muscle strength and prevent thoracic outlet syndrome.Thoracic outlet syndrome care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.[MUSIC PLAYING]All about Thoracic Outlet Syndrome (TOS): OverviewWhat is thoracic outlet syndrome (TOS)?Sam Farres, M.D., Chair, Division of Vascular Surgery Mayo Clinic in Florida:[MUSIC PLAYING]What does thoracic outlet syndrome (TOS) feel like? Dr. Farres:[MUSIC PLAYING]Why does my collarbone hurt? Does thoracic outlet syndrome cause collarbone pain?Dr. Farres:[MUSIC PLAYING]Neurogenic thoracic outlet syndrome.Venous thoracic outlet syndrome.Arterial thoracic outlet syndrome.Differences in anatomy.Poor posture.Trauma.Sex.Age.Advertising & Sponsorship