A thoracic aortic aneurysm is a weakened area in the upper part of the aorta — the major blood vessel that feeds blood to the body. Aneurysms can develop anywhere in the aorta.A thoracic aortic aneurysm is a weakened area in the body's main artery in the chest. The body's main artery is called the aorta. When the aortic wall is weak, the artery may widen. When the vessel is significantly widened, it's called an aneurysm.A thoracic aortic aneurysm also is called a thoracic aneurysm.Treatment of a thoracic aortic aneurysm may vary from regular health checkups to emergency surgery. The type of treatment depends on the cause, size and growth rate of the thoracic aortic aneurysm.Complications of a thoracic aortic aneurysm include rupture of the aorta or a life-threatening tear between the layers of the aorta's wall. The tear is called an aortic dissection. Rupture or dissection can lead to sudden death.Thoracic aortic aneurysms are less common than aneurysms that form in the lower part of the aorta, called abdominal aortic aneurysms.Thoracic aortic aneurysms often grow slowly. There are usually no symptoms, making them difficult to detect. Many start small and stay small. Others grow bigger over time. How quickly a thoracic aortic aneurysm may grow is difficult to predict.As a thoracic aortic aneurysm grows, symptoms may include:Symptoms that a thoracic aortic aneurysm has ruptured or dissected include:Some aneurysms may never rupture or lead to dissection.Most people with aortic aneurysms don't have symptoms unless a dissection or rupture occurs. An aortic dissection or aneurysm rupture is a medical emergency. Call 911 or your local emergency number for immediate help.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesAortic aneurysms can develop anywhere in the body's main artery, called the aorta. The aorta runs from the heart through the chest and belly area. When an aneurysm occurs in the chest, it's called a thoracic aortic aneurysm.If an aneurysm forms between the upper and lower parts of the aorta, it's called a thoracoabdominal aneurysm.A thoracic aneurysm may be round or tube-shaped.Aneurysms can occur anywhere in the thoracic aorta, including near the heart, in the aortic arch and in the lower part of the thoracic aorta.Causes of thoracic aortic aneurysms may include:Genetic conditions. Aortic aneurysms in younger people often have a genetic cause. Marfan syndrome, a genetic condition that affects the connective tissue in the body, may cause weakness in the wall of the aorta.Other genetic conditions linked to aortic aneurysm and dissection and rupture include vascular Ehlers-Danlos, Loeys-Dietz and Turner syndromes.An aortic aneurysm occurs when a weak spot in the wall of the aorta begins to bulge, as shown in the image on the left. An aneurysm can occur anywhere in the aorta. Having an aortic aneurysm increases the risk of a tear in the aortic lining, called a dissection, as shown in the image on the right.In aortic dissection, a tear occurs in the wall of the aorta. This causes bleeding into and along the aortic wall. Sometimes the bleeding moves completely outside the aorta. When this happens, it's called an aortic rupture.An aortic dissection is a potentially life-threatening emergency, depending on where in the aorta it occurs. It's important to treat an aortic aneurysm to try to prevent dissection. If dissection occurs, people can still be treated with surgery. However, they typically have a higher risk of complications.Thoracic aortic aneurysm risk factors include:Tears in the wall of the aorta and rupture of the aorta are the main complications of thoracic aortic aneurysm. However, some small and slow-growing aneurysms may never rupture. In general, the larger the aneurysm, the greater the risk of rupture.Complications of a thoracic aortic aneurysm and rupture can include:Keeping the blood vessels as healthy as possible is important in preventing an aneurysm. A health care provider may recommend these heart-healthy strategies:There are no medicines to prevent an aortic aneurysm. However, medicines may be used to treat high blood pressure, high cholesterol and other conditions linked to aneurysm. Proper management of such conditions may lower the risk of thoracic aortic aneurysm complications.Conditions that cause a thoracic aortic aneurysm may run in families. A health care provider may recommend screening if a first-degree relative — such as a parent, brother, sister, son or daughter — has a genetic disease such as Marfan syndrome or another condition linked to thoracic aortic aneurysms.Screening means you have regular imaging tests, usually an echocardiogram, to check for an aneurysm. If an ultrasound of the heart shows an enlarged aorta or an aneurysm, another imaging test is usually done within 6 to 12 months to make sure it hasn't grown.Genetic testing also may be recommended if you have a family history of aortic aneurysms, particularly if you're considering pregnancy.Thoracic aortic aneurysm care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Aortic Aneurysms support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.433 Replies Tue, Jun 11, 2024 501 Replies Mon, Jun 10, 2024 250 Replies Fri, May 24, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Hardening of the arteries, called atherosclerosis.Genetic conditions.Blood vessel inflammation.Irregular aortic valve.Untreated infection.Traumatic injury.Age.Tobacco use.High blood pressure.Buildup of plaques in the arteries.Family history.Genetic conditions.Bicuspid aortic valve.Life-threatening bleeding inside the body.Blood clots.Stroke.Advertising & Sponsorship