Platelets are parts of the blood that help form blood clots. Thrombocytosis (throm-boe-sie-TOE-sis) is a disorder in which your body produces too many platelets.It's called reactive thrombocytosis or secondary thrombocytosis when the cause is an underlying condition, such as an infection.Less commonly, when the high platelet count has no apparent underlying condition as a cause, the disorder is called primary thrombocythemia or essential thrombocythemia. This is a blood and bone marrow disease.A high platelet level may be detected in a routine blood test known as a complete blood count. It's important to determine whether it's reactive thrombocytosis or essential thrombocythemia to choose the best treatment options.People with high platelet levels often don't have signs or symptoms. When symptoms occur, they're often related to blood clots. Examples include:Less commonly, very high platelet levels may cause bleeding. This can cause:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesBone marrow is a spongy tissue inside your bones. It contains stem cells that can become red blood cells, white blood cells or platelets. Platelets stick together, helping blood to form a clot that stops bleeding when you damage a blood vessel, such as when you cut yourself. Thrombocytosis occurs when your body produces too many platelets.This is the more common type of thrombocytosis. It's caused by an underlying medical problem, such as:The cause of this disorder is unclear. It often appears to be connected to changes in certain genes. The bone marrow produces too many of the cells that form platelets, and these platelets often don't work properly. This poses a much higher risk of clotting or bleeding complications than does reactive thrombocytosis.Essential thrombocythemia can lead to a variety of potentially life-threatening complications, such as:Most women who have essential thrombocythemia have normal, healthy pregnancies. But uncontrolled thrombocythemia can lead to miscarriage and other complications. Your risk of pregnancy complications may be reduced with regular checkups and medication, so be sure to have your doctor regularly monitor your condition.Thrombocytosis care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Blood Cancers & Disorders support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.53 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 60 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 107 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Strokes.Heart attacks.Cancer.Advertising & Sponsorship