Tongue cancer is a type of cancer that starts as a growth of cells on the tongue. The tongue begins in the throat and extends into the mouth. It's made up of muscles and nerves that help with movement and function, such as taste. The tongue aids in speaking, eating and swallowing.Tongue cancer that starts in the mouth is different from tongue cancer that starts in the throat.Several types of cancer can affect the tongue. Tongue cancer most often begins in the thin, flat cells that line the surface of the tongue, called squamous cells. Tongue cancer that starts in these cells is called squamous cell carcinoma.Your health care team considers the type of cancer cells when making a treatment plan. The team also considers the location and size of the cancer. Tongue cancer treatment typically involves surgery and radiation therapy. Other options might be chemotherapy and targeted therapy.Tongue cancer might not cause symptoms at first. Sometimes it's found by a doctor or dentist who examines the mouth for signs of cancer as part of a checkup.When tongue cancer happens in the mouth, the first sign is often a sore on the tongue that doesn't heal. Other symptoms may include pain or bleeding in the mouth and a lump or thickening on the tongue.When tongue cancer happens in the throat, the first sign can be swollen lymph nodes in the neck. Other symptoms may include coughing up blood, weight loss and ear pain. There also may be a lump in the back of the mouth, throat or neck.Other tongue cancer symptoms may include:Make an appointment with a doctor, dentist or other health care professional if you have any symptoms that worry you.Tongue cancer starts when healthy cells in the tongue develop changes in their DNA. A cell's DNA contains the instructions that tell the cell what to do. The changes tell the cells to grow out of control and to continue living when healthy cells would die as part of their natural life cycle. This makes a lot of extra cells. The cells can form a growth, called a tumor. In time, the cells can break away and spread to other areas of the body.It's not always clear what causes the changes that lead to tongue cancer. For some tongue cancers that happen in the throat, human papillomavirus, also called HPV, can be involved. HPV is a common virus that's transmitted through sexual contact. Tongue cancer in the throat that's caused by HPV tends to respond better to treatment compared with tongue cancer in the throat that's not related to HPV.The most common factors that can increase the risk of tongue cancer include:Other factors may include:You can reduce your risk of tongue cancer by:Tongue cancer care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Head & Neck Cancer support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.37 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 9 Replies Fri, Jun 07, 2024 69 Replies Fri, Jun 07, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.In the mouth,In the throat,Tobacco use.Consuming alcohol.Being exposed to HPV.Being male.Increasing age.Trouble maintaining oral hygiene.Having a weak immune system.Don't use tobacco.Limit alcohol intake.Consider the HPV vaccine.Have regular health and dental exams.Advertising & Sponsorship