A tonic-clonic seizure, previously known as a grand mal seizure, causes a loss of consciousness and violent muscle contractions. It's the type of seizure most people picture when they think about seizures.During a seizure, there's a burst of electrical activity in the brain that causes changes in behavior and movements. Seizures can be focal, meaning the burst of electrical activity happens in one area of the brain. Or seizures can be generalized, in which they result in electrical activity in all areas of the brain. Tonic-clonic seizures may begin as focal seizures in a small area of the brain and spread to become generalized seizures that involve the whole brain.Focal and generalized seizures have different symptoms. People who have generalized seizures usually lose consciousness. But people who have focal seizures may or may not lose consciousness. In tonic-clonic seizures, the muscles become stiff, causing the person to fall. Then the muscles alternately flex and relax.Usually, a tonic-clonic seizure is caused by epilepsy. But sometimes this type of seizure can be triggered by other health problems. Very low blood sugar, a high fever or a stroke can cause a tonic-conic seizure.Many people who have a tonic-clonic seizure never have another one and don't need treatment. But someone who has recurrent seizures may need treatment with daily anti-seizure medicines to control and prevent future tonic-clonic seizures.Tonic-clonic seizures have two stages:The following symptoms occur in some but not all people with tonic-clonic seizures:Call 911 or emergency medical help if:If you experience a seizure for the first time, see a healthcare professional.Also see a healthcare professional if you or your child:The brain's nerve cells typically communicate by sending electrical and chemical signals across the synapses that connect the cells. Tonic-clonic seizures occur when there's a surge of electrical activity over the surface of the brain. Many nerve cells fire at once, much faster than usual. Exactly what causes the changes to occur often is not known.However, tonic-clonic seizures are sometimes caused by underlying health problems, such as:Risk factors for tonic-clonic seizures include:Having a seizure at certain times can be dangerous for you or others. You might be at risk of:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Tonic phase.Clonic phase.A scream.Loss of bowel and bladder control.Not responding after convulsions.Confusion.Fatigue.Bad headache.Falling.Drowning.Car accidents.Pregnancy complications.Emotional health issues.Advertising & Sponsorship