Toxoplasmosis (tok-so-plaz-MOE-sis) is an infection with a parasite called Toxoplasma gondii. People often get the infection from eating undercooked meat. You can also get it from contact with cat feces. The parasite can pass to a baby during pregnancy.Most people infected with the parasite do not have symptoms. Some people get flu-like symptoms. Serious disease most often affects infants and people with weakened immune systems. Toxoplasmosis during pregnancy may cause miscarriage and birth defects.Most infections don't need treatment. Drug treatment is used for people with more-serious cases, pregnant people, newborns and people with weakened immune systems. Several steps to prevent toxoplasmosis can lower the risk of infection.Most people infected with toxoplasmosis do not have any symptoms. They often don't know they're infected. Some people have flu-like symptoms, including:The toxoplasma parasites may infect tissues of the inner eye. This can occur in people with healthy immune systems. But the disease is more serious in people with weakened immunity. An infection in the eye is called ocular toxoplasmosis. Symptoms may include:Untreated eye disease can cause blindness.People with weakened immune systems are likely to have more-serious disease from toxoplasmosis. A toxoplasmosis infection from earlier in life may become active again. People at risk include those living with HIV/AIDS, people receiving cancer treatment and people with a transplanted organ.In addition to serious eye disease, toxoplasmosis can cause severe lung or brain disease for a person with weakened immunity. Rarely, the infection can show up in other tissues throughout the body.Lung infection may cause:Toxoplasmosis may cause inflammation of the brain, also called encephalitis. Symptoms may include:Toxoplasmosis can pass from the mother to the fetus during a pregnancy. This is called congenital toxoplasmosis.Infection during the first trimester often causes more-severe disease. It also may result in miscarriage. For some babies with toxoplasmosis, serious disease may be present at birth or appear early in infancy. Medical problems may include:Symptoms of severe disease vary. They may include:Most babies with toxoplasmosis do not show symptoms. But problems may show up later in childhood or teenage years. These include:Talk to your health care provider about a test if you are worried about exposure to the parasite. If you are planning a pregnancy or are pregnant, see your provider if you suspect exposure.The symptoms of severe toxoplasmosis include blurred vision, confusion and loss of coordination. These need immediate medical care, particularly if you have a weakened immune system.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesToxoplasma gondii is a parasite that can infect most animals and birds. It can only go through the entire cycle of reproduction in domestic and wild cats. These are the main hosts for the parasite.Immature eggs, a middle stage of reproduction, can be in the feces of cats. This immature egg allows for the parasite to make its way through the food chain. It can pass from soil and water to plants, animals and humans. Once the parasite has a new host, the reproduction cycle goes on and causes an infection.If you're in typical health, your immune system keeps the parasites in check. They stay in your body but are not active. This often gives you lifelong immunity. If you're exposed to the parasite again, your immune system would clear it out.If your immune system is weakened later in life, parasite reproduction can start again. This causes a new active infection that can lead to serious disease and complications.People often get a toxoplasma infection one of the following ways:The parasite is found throughout the world. Anyone can become infected.Risks of serious disease from toxoplasmosis include things that prevent the immune system from fighting infections, such as:Certain precautions can help prevent toxoplasmosis:If you're pregnant or otherwise at risk of toxoplasmosis, take these steps to protect yourself:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Cat feces with the parasite.Contaminated food or water.Unwashed fruits and vegetables.Contaminated kitchen tool.Infected organ transplant or transfused blood.Wear gloves when you garden or handle soil.Don't eat raw or undercooked meat.Don't eat raw shellfish.Wash kitchen utensils thoroughly.Wash all fruits and vegetables.Don't drink unpasteurized goat milk.Don't drink untreated water.Cover children's sandboxes.Help your cat stay healthy.Avoid stray cats or kittens.Have someone else clean the litter box.Advertising & Sponsorship