Trachoma (truh-KOH-muh) is a bacterial infection that affects your eyes. It's caused by the bacterium Chlamydia trachomatis. Trachoma is contagious, spreading through contact with the eyes, eyelids, and nose or throat secretions of infected people. It can also be passed on by handling infected items, such as handkerchiefs.At first, trachoma may cause mild itching and irritation of your eyes and eyelids. Then you may notice swollen eyelids and pus draining from the eyes. Untreated trachoma can lead to blindness.Trachoma is the leading preventable cause of blindness worldwide. Most trachoma cases occur in poor areas of Africa, where 85% of people with active disease reside. In areas where trachoma is prevalent, infection rates among children under 5 can be 60% or more.Early treatment may help prevent trachoma complications.Signs and symptoms of trachoma usually affect both eyes and may include:Young children are particularly susceptible to infection. But the disease progresses slowly, and the more painful symptoms may not emerge until adulthood. The World Health Organization (WHO) has identified five stages in the development of trachoma:All the signs of trachoma are more severe in your upper lid than in your lower lid. Without intervention, a disease process that begins in childhood can continue to advance into adulthood.Call your doctor if you or your child has itchy or irritated eyes or discharge from the eyes, especially if you live in or recently traveled to an area where trachoma is common. Trachoma is a contagious condition. Treating it as soon as possible helps prevent serious infection.Trachoma is caused by certain subtypes of Chlamydia trachomatis, a bacterium that can also cause the sexually transmitted infection chlamydia.Trachoma spreads through contact with discharge from the eyes or nose of an infected person. Hands, clothing, towels and insects can all be routes for transmission. In developing countries, eye-seeking flies also are a means of transmission.Factors that increase your risk of contracting trachoma include:One episode of trachoma caused by Chlamydia trachomatis is easily treated with early detection and use of antibiotics. Repeated or secondary infections can lead to complications, including:If you've been treated for trachoma with antibiotics or surgery, reinfection is always a concern. For your protection and for the safety of others, be sure that family members or others you live with are screened and, if necessary, treated for trachoma.Trachoma can occur worldwide but is more common in Africa, Asia, Latin America, the Middle East and the Pacific Rim. When in regions where trachoma is common, take extra care in practicing good hygiene, which can help prevent infection.Proper hygiene practices include:No trachoma vaccine is available, but prevention is possible. The WHO has developed a strategy to prevent trachoma, with the goal of eliminating it by 2020. While the goal hasn't been entirely achieved, trachoma cases have declined sharply. The strategy, titled SAFE, involves:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Inflammation — follicular.Inflammation — intense.Eyelid scarring.In-turned eyelashes (trichiasis).Corneal clouding (opacity).Crowded living conditions.Poor sanitation.Age.Sex.Flies.Face washing and hand-washing.Fly control.Proper waste management.Improved access to water.SAFEAdvertising & Sponsorship