In tricuspid valve regurgitation, the valve between the two right heart chambers doesn't close properly. The upper right chamber is called the right atrium. The lower right chamber is called the right ventricle. As a result, blood flows backward.Tricuspid valve regurgitation is a type of heart valve disease. The valve between the two right heart chambers doesn't close as it should. Blood flows backward through the valve into the upper right chamber. If you have tricuspid valve regurgitation, less blood flows to the lungs. The heart has to work harder to pump blood.The condition also may be called:Some people are born with heart valve disease that leads to tricuspid regurgitation. This is called congenital heart valve disease. But tricuspid valve regurgitation also may occur later in life due to infections and other health conditions.Mild tricuspid valve regurgitation may not cause symptoms or require treatment. If the condition is severe and causing symptoms, medicine or surgery may be needed.The tricuspid valve's job is to allow blood flowing into the heart from the body to flow to the right ventricle where it's pumped to the lungs for oxygen. If the tricuspid valve is leaky, blood can flow backwards, causing the heart to pump harder. Over time, the heart becomes enlarged and functions poorly.Tricuspid valve regurgitation often doesn't cause symptoms until the condition is severe. It may be found when medical tests are done for another reason.Symptoms of tricuspid valve regurgitation may include:Make an appointment for a health checkup if you get tired very easily or feel short of breath with activity. You may need to see a doctor trained in heart conditions, called a cardiologist.A typical heart has two upper and two lower chambers. The upper chambers, the right and left atria, receive incoming blood. The lower chambers, the more muscular right and left ventricles, pump blood out of the heart. The heart valves help keep blood flowing in the right direction.To understand the causes of tricuspid valve regurgitation, it may help to know how the heart and heart valves typically work.A typical heart has four chambers.Four valves open and close to keep blood flowing in the correct direction. These heart valves are:The tricuspid valve is between the heart's two right chambers. It has three thin flaps of tissue, called cusps or leaflets. These flaps open to let blood move from the upper right chamber to the lower right chamber. The valve flaps then close tightly so blood doesn't flow backward.In tricuspid valve regurgitation, the tricuspid valve doesn't close tightly. So, blood leaks backward into the upper right heart chamber.Causes of tricuspid valve regurgitation include:A risk factor is something that makes you more likely to get a sickness or other health condition.Things that can increase the risk of tricuspid valve regurgitation are:Tricuspid valve regurgitation complications may depend on how severe the condition is. Possible complications of tricuspid regurgitation include:Tricuspid valve regurgitation care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart & Blood Health support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.346 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 58 Replies Thu, Jun 20, 2024 106 Replies Wed, Jun 19, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.A heart problem you're born with, also called a congenital heart defect.Marfan syndrome. Rheumatic fever.Infection of the lining of the heart and heart valves, also called infective endocarditis.Carcinoid syndrome.Chest injury.Pacemaker or other heart device wires.Heart biopsy, also called an endomyocardial biopsy.Radiation therapy.An irregular and often rapid heartbeat, called atrial fibrillation (AFib).Heart failure.Advertising & Sponsorship