Trigeminal neuralgia (try-JEM-ih-nul nu-RAL-juh) is a condition that causes intense pain similar to an electric shock on one side of the face. It affects the trigeminal nerve, which carries signals from the face to the brain. Even light touch from brushing your teeth or putting on makeup may trigger a jolt of pain. Trigeminal neuralgia can be long-lasting. It's known as a chronic pain condition.People with trigeminal neuralgia may at first experience short, mild episodes of pain. But the condition can get worse, causing longer periods of pain that happen more often. It's more common in women and people older than 50.But trigeminal neuralgia, also known as tic douloureux, doesn't mean living a life of pain. It usually can be managed with treatment.Trigeminal neuralgia results in pain occurring in an area of the face supplied by one or more of the three branches of the trigeminal nerve.Trigeminal neuralgia symptoms may include one or more of these patterns:See your healthcare professional if you experience pain in your face, particularly if it's long-lasting or comes back after going away. Also get medical attention if you have chronic pain that doesn't go away with pain medicine that you buy off the shelf.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesTrigeminal neuralgia is caused by a disruption in the trigeminal nerve's function.In trigeminal neuralgia, the trigeminal nerve's function is disrupted. Contact between a blood vessel and the trigeminal nerve at the base of the brain often causes the pain. The blood vessel may be an artery or a vein. This contact puts pressure on the nerve and doesn't allow it to function as usual.But while compression by a blood vessel is a common cause, there are many other potential causes. Multiple sclerosis or a similar condition that damages the myelin sheath protecting certain nerves can cause trigeminal neuralgia. A tumor pressing against the trigeminal nerve also can cause the condition.Some people may experience trigeminal neuralgia as a result of a stroke or facial trauma. An injury of the nerve due to surgery also can cause trigeminal neuralgia.Several triggers may set off the pain of trigeminal neuralgia, including:Research has found that some factors put people at higher risk of trigeminal neuralgia, including:Trigeminal neuralgia care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Sex.Age.Certain conditions.Advertising & Sponsorship