Triple X syndrome, also called trisomy X or 47,XXX, is a genetic disorder that affects about 1 in 1,000 females. Females normally have two X chromosomes in all cells — one X chromosome from each parent. In triple X syndrome, a female has three X chromosomes.Many girls and women with triple X syndrome don't experience symptoms or have only mild symptoms. In others, symptoms may be more apparent — possibly including developmental delays and learning disabilities. Seizures and kidney problems occur in a small number of girls and women with triple X syndrome.Treatment for triple X syndrome depends on which symptoms, if any, are present and their severity.Signs and symptoms can vary greatly among girls and women with triple X syndrome. Many experience no noticeable effects or have only mild symptoms.Being taller than average height is the most typical physical feature. Most females with triple X syndrome experience normal sexual development and have the ability to become pregnant. Some girls and women with triple X syndrome have intelligence in the normal range, but possibly slightly lower when compared with siblings. Others may have intellectual disabilities and sometimes may have behavioral problems.Occasionally, significant symptoms may occur, which vary among individuals. These signs and symptoms may show up as:Sometimes females with triple X syndrome have these signs and symptoms:If you're concerned about any signs or symptoms, make an appointment to talk with your family health care provider or pediatrician, who can help determine the cause and suggest appropriate action.Although triple X syndrome is genetic, it's usually not inherited — it's due to a random genetic error.Normally, people have 46 chromosomes in each cell, organized into 23 pairs, including two sex chromosomes. One set of chromosomes is from the mother and the other set is from the father. These chromosomes contain genes, which carry instructions that determine everything from height to eye color.The pair of sex chromosomes — either XX or XY — determines a child's sex. A mother can give the child only an X chromosome, but a father can pass on an X or a Y chromosome:Females with triple X syndrome have a third X chromosome from a random error in cell division. This error can happen before conception or early in the embryo's development, resulting in one of these forms of triple X syndrome:Triple X syndrome is also called 47,XXX syndrome because the extra X chromosome results in 47 chromosomes in each cell instead of the usual 46.Although some females may have mild or no symptoms associated with triple X syndrome, others experience developmental, psychological and behavioral problems that may lead to a variety of other issues, including:Feb 02, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.