In truncus arteriosus, one large vessel comes out of the heart, instead of two separate ones. There's also usually a hole in the wall between the lower heart chambers, called the ventricles. The hole is called a ventricular septal defect. In truncus arteriosus, oxygen-rich blood, shown in red, and oxygen-poor blood, shown in blue, mix together. The mixed blood is shown in purple. It doesn't contain enough oxygen for the body's needs.Truncus arteriosus (TRUNG-kus ahr-teer-e-O-sus) is a rare heart problem present at birth. That means it's a congenital heart defect. In this condition, one large blood vessel leads out of the heart, instead of two.Having only one large blood vessel means that oxygen-poor and oxygen-rich blood mix. This mixing reduces the amount of oxygen delivered to the body. It usually increases the amount of blood flow into the lungs too. The heart has to work harder to adjust for the changes in blood flow.A person with truncus arteriosus also usually has a hole between the two lower heart chambers, called the ventricles. The hole is called a ventricular septal defect.Another name for truncus arteriosus is common arterial trunk.Truncus arteriosus is a life-threatening condition. A baby with the condition needs surgery to repair the heart problems and fix blood flow. Surgery is generally successful, especially if done before the baby is 1 month old.Symptoms of truncus arteriosus usually occur in the first few days of life. They include:If you have concerns about your baby's feedings, sleep patterns or growth, contact your health care provider for an appointment.Always seek emergency medical care if a baby has any of the following:Truncus arteriosus occurs as a baby's heart forms during pregnancy. There's often no clear cause. Genetics and environmental factors may play a role.To understand more about truncus arteriosus, it may be helpful to know how the heart typically works.The typical heart is made of four chambers. They are:The formation of a baby's heart is complex. At a certain point, babies in the womb have a single large blood vessel exiting the heart. The vessel is called the truncus arteriosus. It usually splits in two as the baby grows in the womb. One part becomes the lower end of the body's main artery, called the aorta. The other part becomes the lower part of the pulmonary artery.But in some babies, the truncus arteriosus never splits. The wall separating the two lower heart chambers isn't closed completely. This results in a large hole between those chambers, called a ventricular septal defect.Babies with truncus arteriosus also typically have a problem with the heart valve that controls blood flow from the lower heart chambers to the single vessel. This valve may not close completely when the heart relaxes. Blood can move the wrong way, back into the heart. This is called truncal valve regurgitation.The exact cause of truncus arteriosus is unknown. But some things might increase the risk of a heart problem at birth. Risk factors include:Truncus arteriosus causes severe problems with how blood flows through the lungs, heart and rest of the body.Complications of truncus arteriosus in babies include:Even with successful surgical repair of the heart during infancy, other complications can occur later in life. These complications include:Common symptoms of these complications include:Rarely, some people born with truncus arteriosus can survive without surgery to fix the heart problems. They may live into adulthood. But those with the condition will almost certainly have heart failure and develop a complication called Eisenmenger syndrome. This syndrome is caused by permanent lung vessel damage. It results in a significant lack of blood flow to the lungs.Because the cause is unclear, it may not be possible to prevent truncus arteriosus. Getting good prenatal care is important. If you have a family history of heart problems present at birth, consider talking with a genetic counselor and a heart doctor, called a cardiologist, before getting pregnant.If you decide to get pregnant, taking these steps can help keep your baby healthy:Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart & Blood Health support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.346 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 58 Replies Thu, Jun 20, 2024 106 Replies Wed, Jun 19, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.The right upper chamber, also called the right atrium.The right lower chamber, also called the right ventricle.The left upper chamber, also called the left atrium.The left lower chamber, also called the left ventricle.Viral illness during pregnancy.Poorly controlled diabetes during pregnancy.Certain medicines taken during pregnancy.Certain chromosomal disorders.Smoking during pregnancy.Alcohol use.Obesity.Breathing problems.High blood pressure in the lungs, also called pulmonary hypertension.Enlargement of the heart.Heart failure.Get recommended vaccinations.Talk to your provider about your medicines.Take a folic acid supplement.Control diabetes.Advertising & Sponsorship