Tuberculosis (TB) is a serious illness that mainly affects the lungs. The germs that cause tuberculosis are a type of bacteria.Tuberculosis can spread when a person with the illness coughs, sneezes or sings. This can put tiny droplets with the germs into the air. Another person can then breathe in the droplets, and the germs enter the lungs.Tuberculosis spreads easily where people gather in crowds or where people live in crowded conditions. People with HIV/AIDS and other people with weakened immune systems have a higher risk of catching tuberculosis than people with typical immune systems.Drugs called antibiotics can treat tuberculosis. But some forms of the bacteria no longer respond well to treatments.When tuberculosis (TB) germs survive and multiply in the lungs, it is called a TB infection. A TB infection may be in one of three stages. Symptoms are different in each stage.Primary TB infection. The first stage is called the primary infection. Immune system cells find and capture the germs. The immune system may completely destroy the germs. But some captured germs may still survive and multiply.Most people don't have symptoms during a primary infection. Some people may get flu-like symptoms, such as:Latent TB infection. Primary infection is usually followed by the stage called latent TB infection. Immune system cells build a wall around lung tissue with TB germs. The germs can't do any more harm if the immune system keeps them under control. But the germs survive. There are no symptoms during latent TB infection.Active TB disease. Active TB disease happens when the immune system can't control an infection. Germs cause disease throughout the lungs or other parts of the body. Active TB disease may happen right after primary infection. But it usually happens after months or years of latent TB infection.Symptoms of active TB disease in the lungs usually begin gradually and worsen over a few weeks. They may include:Active TB disease outside the lungs. TB infection can spread from the lungs to other parts of the body. This is called extrapulmonary tuberculosis. Symptoms vary depending on what part of the body is infected. Common symptoms may include:Active TB disease in the voice box is outside the lungs, but it has symptoms more like disease in the lungs.Common sites of active TB disease outside the lungs include:Active TB disease in children. Symptoms of active TB disease in children vary. Typically, symptoms by age may include the following:The symptoms of tuberculosis are similar to symptoms of many different illnesses. See your health care provider if you have symptoms that don't improve with a few days of rest.Get emergency care if you have:Get immediate or urgent care if you:Tuberculosis is caused by a bacterium called Mycobacterium tuberculosis.People with active TB disease in the lungs or voice box can spread the disease. They release tiny droplets that carry the bacteria through the air. This can happen when they're speaking, singing, laughing, coughing or sneezing. A person can get an infection after inhaling the droplets.The disease is more likely to spread when people spend a lot of time together in an indoor space. So the disease spreads easily in places where people live or work together for long periods. Also, the disease spreads more easily in crowded gatherings.A person with a latent TB infection cannot pass the disease to other people. A person taking drugs to treat active TB disease usually can't pass the disease after 2 to 3 weeks of treatment.Some forms of the TB bacteria have become drug resistant. This means that drugs that once cured the disease no longer work.This happens, in part, because of naturally occurring genetic changes in bacteria. A random genetic change in a bacterium might give it some quality that makes it more likely to survive the attack of an antibiotic. If it does survive, then it can multiply.When antibiotic drugs aren't used correctly — or drugs fail to kill all the bacteria for another reason — the conditions are ideal for more-resistant versions of the bacteria to get established and multiply. If these bacteria are passed on to other people, a new drug-resistant strain can grow over time.Problems that can lead to such drug-resistant strains of bacteria include the following:Anyone can get tuberculosis, but certain factors increase the risk of getting an infection. Other factors increase the risk of an infection becoming active TB disease.The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends a TB test for people who have an increased risk of TB infection or active TB disease. Talk to your health care provider if you have one or more of the following risk factors.Certain living or working conditions make it easier for the disease to pass from one person to another. These conditions increase the risk of getting a TB infection:A weakened immune system increases the risk of a TB infection becoming active TB disease. Conditions or treatments that weaken the immune system include:The risk of a TB infection becoming active TB disease changes with age.If you test positive for latent TB infection, you may need to take drugs to prevent active TB disease.If you have active TB disease, you'll need to take steps to prevent other people from getting an infection. You will take drugs for four, six or nine months. Take all of the drugs as directed during the entire time.During the first 2 to 3 weeks, you will be able to pass TB bacteria to others. Protect others with these steps:In countries where tuberculosis is common, infants often are vaccinated with the bacille Calmette-Guerin (BCG) vaccine. This protects infants and toddlers who are more likely to have active TB disease in the fluid surrounding the brain and spinal cord.The vaccine may not protect against disease in the lungs, which is more likely in the United States. Dozens of new TB vaccines are in various stages of development and testing.Mar 22, 2023CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.