A testicle that doesn't move down into its proper place in the scrotum before birth is called an undescended testicle. It's also known as cryptorchidism (krip-TOR-kih-diz-um). Most often, it's just one testicle that doesn't descend into the scrotum, which is the bag of skin that hangs below the penis. But sometimes both testicles are affected.An undescended testicle is more common in premature babies than it is in full-term infants. An undescended testicle often moves down on its own within a few months after the baby is born. If your baby has an undescended testicle that doesn't correct itself, surgery can be done to move the testicle into the scrotum.Not seeing or feeling a testicle in the scrotum is the main symptom of an undescended testicle.Testicles form in an unborn baby's lower belly. During the last few months of pregnancy, the testicles typically move down from the stomach area. They move through a tubelike passage in the groin, called the inguinal canal, and descend into the scrotum. With an undescended testicle, that process stops or is delayed.An undescended testicle often is found during an exam done shortly after birth. If your baby has an undescended testicle, ask how often exams will need to be done. If the testicle hasn't moved into the scrotum by 3 to 4 months of age, the condition likely won't correct itself.Treating an undescended testicle when your child is still a baby might lower the risk of health problems later in life. These include cancer of the testicles and not being able to get a partner pregnant, also called infertility.Older boys — from infants to preteens — who have descended testicles at birth might appear to be missing a testicle later. This might be a symptom of:Talk to your child's doctor or other member of their care team if you notice any changes in your child's genitals or if you have other concerns.The exact cause of an undescended testicle isn't known. Genes, the health of the baby's mother and other factors might have a combined effect. Together they may disrupt the hormones, physical changes and nerve activity that play roles in how the testicles develop.Things that might raise the risk of an undescended testicle in a newborn include:The testicles need to be slightly cooler than regular body temperature to develop and work well. The scrotum provides this cooler place. Complications of a testicle not being located where it's supposed to be include:Testicular cancer. Men who've had an undescended testicle have a higher risk of testicular cancer. This disease often begins in testicle cells that make immature sperm. It's not clear why these cells turn into cancer.The risk is greater in men who've had undescended testicles located in the stomach area than in men who've had undescended testicles in the groin. The risk also is higher when both testicles are affected. Surgery to correct an undescended testicle might lower the risk of testicular cancer. But the cancer risk doesn't go away completely.Other health conditions linked with an undescended testicle include: Undescended testicle care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.A retractile testicle,An ascending testicle,Testicular cancer.Fertility problems.Testicular torsion.Trauma.Inguinal hernia.Advertising & Sponsorship