Your urinary system includes the kidneys, ureters, bladder and urethra. The urinary system removes waste from the body through urine. The kidneys are located toward the back of the upper abdomen. They filter waste and fluid from the blood and produce urine. Urine moves from the kidneys through narrow tubes to the bladder. These tubes are called the ureters. The bladder stores urine until it's time to urinate. Urine leaves the body through another small tube called the urethra.Your urinary system includes the kidneys, ureters, bladder and urethra. The urinary system removes waste from the body through urine. The kidneys are located toward the back of the upper abdomen. They filter waste and fluid from the blood and produce urine. Urine moves from the kidneys through narrow tubes to the bladder. These tubes are called the ureters. The bladder stores urine until it's time to urinate. Urine leaves the body through another small tube called the urethra.A ureteral obstruction is a blockage in one or both of the tubes (ureters) that carry urine from the kidneys to the bladder. Ureteral obstruction can be cured. However, if it's not treated, symptoms can quickly move from mild — pain, fever and infection — to severe — loss of kidney function, sepsis and death.Ureteral obstruction is fairly common. Because it's treatable, severe complications are rare.Ureteral obstruction might have no signs or symptoms. Signs and symptoms depend on where the obstruction occurs, whether it's partial or complete, how quickly it develops, and whether it affects one or both kidneys.Signs and symptoms might include:Make an appointment with your health care provider if you have signs and symptoms that worry you.Seek medical attention if you experience:A duplicated ureter occurs when two ureters form on the same kidney. A ureterocele is a small bulge in the ureter, usually in the end closest to the bladder. Both conditions may lead to ureteral obstruction.Different types of ureteral obstruction have different causes, some of them present at birth (congenital). They include:Various causes inside (intrinsic) or outside (extrinsic) the ureter can lead to ureteral obstruction, including:Certain conditions present at birth can increase the risk of having ureteral obstruction. Having kidney stones or bladder stones also might increase the risk that one of the ureters becomes blocked. Blood clots, tumors, certain tissue growth and enlarged lymph nodes might also be factors in developing this condition.Ureteral obstruction can lead to urinary tract infections and kidney damage, which can be irreversible.Ureteral obstruction care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.A second (duplicated) ureter.A blockage (obstruction) where the ureter connects to the kidney or bladder.Ureterocele.Retroperitoneal fibrosis.Advertising & Sponsorship