Uterine fibroids are common growths of the uterus. They often appear during the years you're usually able to get pregnant and give birth. Uterine fibroids are not cancer, and they almost never turn into cancer. They aren't linked with a higher risk of other types of cancer in the uterus either. They're also called leiomyomas (lie-o-my-O-muhs) or myomas.Fibroids vary in number and size. You can have a single fibroid or more than one. Some of these growths are too small to see with the eyes. Others can grow to the size of a grapefruit or larger. A fibroid that gets very big can distort the inside and the outside of the uterus. In extreme cases, some fibroids grow large enough to fill the pelvis or stomach area. They can make a person look pregnant.Many people have uterine fibroids sometime during their lives. But you might not know you have them, because they often cause no symptoms. Your health care professional may just happen to find fibroids during a pelvic exam or pregnancy ultrasound.There are three major types of uterine fibroids. Intramural fibroids grow within the muscular uterine wall. Submucosal fibroids bulge into the uterine cavity. Subserosal fibroids project to the outside of the uterus. Some submucosal or subserosal fibroids may be pedunculated. This means they hang from a stalk inside or outside the uterus.Many people who have uterine fibroids don't have any symptoms. In those who do, symptoms can be influenced by the location, size and number of fibroids.The most common symptoms of uterine fibroids include:Rarely, a fibroid can cause sudden, serious pain when it outgrows its blood supply and starts to die.Often, fibroids are grouped by their location. Intramural fibroids grow within the muscular wall of the uterus. Submucosal fibroids bulge into the uterine cavity. Subserosal fibroids form on the outside of the uterus.See your doctor if you have:Get medical care right away if you have severe bleeding from the vagina or sharp pelvic pain that comes on fast.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Get the latest information from our Mayo Clinic experts on women’s health topics, serious and complex conditions, wellness and more. Click to view a preview and subscribe below.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe exact cause of uterine fibroids isn't clear. But these factors may play roles:Hormones. Two hormones called estrogen and progesterone cause the tissue the lines the inside of the uterus to thicken during each menstrual cycle to prepare for pregnancy. These hormones also seem to help fibroids grow.Fibroids contain more cells that estrogen and progesterone bind to than do typical uterine muscle cells. Fibroids tend to shrink after menopause due to a drop in hormone levels.Doctors believe that uterine fibroids may develop from a stem cell in the smooth muscular tissue of the uterus. A single cell divides over and over. In time it turns into a firm, rubbery mass distinct from nearby tissue.The growth patterns of uterine fibroids vary. They may grow slowly or fast. Or they might stay the same size. Some fibroids go through growth spurts, and some shrink on their own.Fibroids that form during pregnancy can shrink or go away after pregnancy, as the uterus goes back to its usual size.There are few known risk factors for uterine fibroids, other than being a person of reproductive age. These include:Uterine fibroids often aren't dangerous. But they can cause pain, and they may lead to complications. These include a drop in red blood cells called anemia. That condition can cause fatigue from heavy blood loss. If you bleed heavily during your period, your doctor may tell you to take an iron supplement to prevent or help manage anemia. Sometimes, a person with anemia needs to receive blood from a donor, called a transfusion, due to blood loss.Often, fibroids don't interfere with getting pregnant. But some fibroids — especially the submucosal kind — could cause infertility or pregnancy loss.Fibroids also may raise the risk of certain pregnancy complications. These include:Researchers continue to study the causes of fibroid tumors. More research is needed on how to prevent them, though. It might not be possible to prevent uterine fibroids. But only a small percentage of these tumors need treatment.You might be able to lower your fibroid risk with healthy lifestyle changes. Try to stay at a healthy weight. Get regular exercise. And eat a balanced diet with plenty of fruits and vegetables.Some research suggests that birth control pills or long-acting progestin-only contraceptives may lower the risk of fibroids. But using birth control pills before the age of 16 may be linked with a higher risk.Uterine fibroids care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Gene changes.Hormones.Other growth factors.Extracellular matrix (ECM).Race.Family history.Other factors.Advertising & Sponsorship