Supporting ligaments and other connective tissues hold the uterus in place. When these supportive tissues stretch and weaken, the uterus can move out of its original place down into the vagina. This is called a prolapsed uterus.Uterine prolapse occurs when pelvic floor muscles and ligaments stretch and weaken until they no longer provide enough support for the uterus. As a result, the uterus slips down into or protrudes out of the vagina.Uterine prolapse most often affects people after menopause who've had one or more vaginal deliveries.Mild uterine prolapse usually doesn't require treatment. But uterine prolapse that causes discomfort or disrupts daily life might benefit from treatment.Mild uterine prolapse is common after childbirth. It generally doesn't cause symptoms. Symptoms of moderate to severe uterine prolapse include:See a health care provider to talk about treatment options if symptoms of uterine prolapse bother you and keep you from doing daily activities.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Get the latest information from our Mayo Clinic experts on women’s health topics, serious and complex conditions, wellness and more. Click to view a preview and subscribe below.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesUterine prolapse results from the weakening of pelvic muscles and supportive tissues. Causes of weakened pelvic muscles and tissues include:Factors that can increase the risk of uterine prolapse include:Uterine prolapse often happens with prolapse of other pelvic organs. These types of prolapse can also happen:To reduce the risk of uterine prolapse, try to:Uterine prolapse care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Anterior prolapse.Posterior vaginal prolapse.Prevent constipation.Avoid heavy lifting.Control coughing.Avoid weight gain.Advertising & Sponsorship