Vaginal agenesis (a-JEN-uh-sis) is a rare disorder in which the vagina doesn't develop, and the womb (uterus) may only develop partially or not at all. This condition is present before birth and may also be associated with kidney or skeletal problems.The condition is also known as mullerian agenesis, mullerian aplasia or Mayer-Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser syndrome.Vaginal agenesis is often identified at puberty when a female does not begin menstruating. Use of a vaginal dilator, a tubelike device that can stretch the vagina when used over a period of time, is often successful in creating a vagina. In some cases, surgery may be needed. Treatment makes it possible to have vaginal intercourse.Vaginal agenesis often goes unnoticed until females reach their teens, but don't menstruate (amenorrhea). Other signs of puberty usually follow typical female development.Vaginal agenesis may have these features:Vaginal agenesis may also be associated with other issues, such as:If you haven't had a menstrual period by age 15, see your health care provider.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Get the latest information from our Mayo Clinic experts on women’s health topics, serious and complex conditions, wellness and more. Click to view a preview and subscribe below.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesIt's not clear what causes vaginal agenesis, but at some point during the first 20 weeks of pregnancy, tubes called the mullerian ducts don't develop properly.Typically, the lower portion of these ducts develops into the uterus and vagina, and the upper portion becomes the fallopian tubes. The underdevelopment of the mullerian ducts results in an absent or partially closed vagina, absent or partial uterus, or both.Vaginal agenesis may impact your sexual relationships, but after treatment, your vagina will typically function well for sexual activity.Females with a missing or partially developed uterus can't get pregnant. If you have healthy ovaries, however, it may be possible to have a baby through in vitro fertilization. The embryo can be implanted in the uterus of another person to carry the pregnancy (gestational carrier). Discuss fertility options with your health care provider.Vaginal agenesis care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship