A varicocele is enlargement of the veins that transport oxygen-depleted blood away from the testicle.A varicocele (VAR-ih-koe-seel) is an enlargement of the veins within the loose bag of skin that holds the testicles (scrotum). These veins transport oxygen-depleted blood from the testicles. A varicocele occurs when blood pools in the veins rather than circulating efficiently out of the scrotum.Varicoceles usually form during puberty and develop over time. They may cause some discomfort or pain, but they often result in no symptoms or complications.A varicocele may cause poor development of a testicle, low sperm production or other problems that may lead to infertility. Surgery to treat varicocele may be recommended to address these complications.A varicocele usually occurs on the left side of the scrotum and often produces no signs or symptoms. Possible signs and symptoms may include:Annual wellness visits for boys are important for monitoring the development and health of testicles. It's important to schedule and keep these appointments.A number of conditions could contribute to pain, swelling or a mass in the scrotum. If you experience any of these, see your health care provider to get a timely and accurate diagnosis.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe male reproductive system makes, stores and moves sperm. The testicles produce sperm. Fluid from the seminal vesicles and prostate gland combines with sperm to make semen. The penis ejaculates semen during sexual intercourse.The testicles receive oxygen-rich blood from two testicular arteries — one artery for each side of the scrotum. Similarly, there are also two testicular veins that transport oxygen-depleted blood back toward the heart. Within each side of the scrotum, a network of small veins (pampiniform plexus) transport the oxygen-depleted blood from the testicle to the main testicular vein. A varicocele is the enlargement of the pampiniform plexus.The exact cause of a varicocele is unknown. One contributing factor may be the malfunction of valves inside the veins that are intended to keep blood moving in the right direction. Also, the left testicular vein follows a slightly different path than the right vein — a path that makes a problem with blood flow more likely on the left.When the oxygen-depleted blood gets backed up in the network of veins, they widen (dilate), creating the varicocele.There don't appear to be any significant risk factors for developing a varicocele.Having a varicocele can make it difficult for your body to regulate the temperature of the testicles. Oxidative stress and the buildup of toxins can result. These factors may contribute to the following complications:Varicocele care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Pain.A mass in the scrotum.Differently sized testicles.Infertility.Poor testicular health.Infertility.Advertising & Sponsorship