In ventricular tachycardia, an irregular electrical impulse starting in the lower chambers of the heart makes the heart beat faster.Ventricular tachycardia is a type of irregular heartbeat, called an arrhythmia. It starts in the lower chambers of the heart, called the ventricles. This condition also may be called V-tach or VT.A healthy heart typically beats about 60 to 100 times a minute at rest. In ventricular tachycardia, the heart beats faster, usually 100 or more beats a minute.Sometimes the rapid heartbeat stops the heart chambers from properly filling with blood. The heart may not be able to pump enough blood to the body. If this happens, you may feel short of breath or lightheaded. Some people lose consciousness.Ventricular tachycardia episodes may be brief and last only a few seconds without causing harm. But episodes lasting more than a few seconds, called sustained V-tach, can be life-threatening. Sometimes ventricular tachycardia can cause all heart activity to stop. This complication is called sudden cardiac arrest.Treatments for ventricular tachycardia include medicines, a shock to the heart, a heart device, and a procedure or surgery.Mayo Clinic cardiologist Suraj Kapa, M.D., discusses common misconceptions about ventricular tachycardia.I'm Dr. Suraj Kapa, a Mayo Clinic cardiologist specializing in heart rhythm disorders. Today, I'm going to talk about the condition known as ventricular tachycardia. Now, if you go on the internet and you look up ventricular tachycardia, you might find yourself concerned because people tell you, oh, this is associated with sudden death, or, oh, you might have to seek urgent medical attention. But I'm going to try and clarify things for you a little bit, both about what this might be and how we might go about treating it.Ventricular arrhythmias can occur in both structurally normal and structurally abnormal hearts. What we mean by this is that there are some patients out there who really have no other underlying heart disease except some abnormality in their electrical system of the bottom chambers of their heart, or the ventricles, that can cause the heart to go out of rhythm. These can appear as occasional extra beats that one might experience as skipped beats, or as a rapid array of beats that are occurring all in a row, termed ventricular tachycardia. In rare cases, if the heart is structurally normal, this can actually result in a dangerous rhythm, though again that's relatively rare if there's not some other underlying heart disease that might be contributing.Now, in some patients, however, they can have an abnormal heart for other reasons. There are a variety of reasons that the heart can become structurally abnormal, such as if you've had a heart attack in the past, if you have some sort of genetic abnormality that you might have inherited from your mother or your father. You might have some inflammatory disorder of your heart, such as sarcoidosis or myocarditis. All of these different syndromes can contribute to electrical abnormalities in the bottom chamber of the heart as well, but sometimes, when people have what we call substrate, or abnormalities of the normal heart architecture, this can lead to ventricular arrhythmias. And in these patients, these ventricular arrhythmias can potentially be life-threatening.When we look at these arrhythmias happening, however, we have to take a systematic approach to their evaluation and to their treatment. So what do I mean by this? When we talk about evaluation, we're looking to see, Is there another reason they happened? Was there a medication you were placed on, was there some abnormality in your electrolytes, or what you were taking for other reasons, such as over-the counter herbal remedies, that might have contributed to why you might have those arrhythmias, and in fact they might go away if we do nothing else?We're also trying to figure out how significant the arrhythmia is. Is it something that is life-threatening, or is not, because not all of them are. And then when we talk about treatment, we're looking really at two large areas. In those patients who don't have dangerous ventricular arrhythmias, we're looking to treat to improve quality of life, or symptoms, because some patients can have a variety of symptoms attributable to these arrhythmias, including feelings of skipped beats or rapid heart beats, or even dizziness. But some might just feel tired.But then, the other group we worry about is the ones in whom these arrhythmias can potentially be mortal. In other words, they can lead to sudden death. In those patients, we like to risk stratify to figure out are these arrhythmias dangerous, and how do we protect those patients from dying suddenly.The mainstay of treatments you might see if you go online is something called a defibrillator. You might have seen this on commercials or on TV shows where people are running about with these pads, drop them on a patient, and then provide an electric shock. This is what a defibrillator does for those patients who have the more risky ventricular arrhythmias. It sits in your body all the time, and then basically gives a jolt of electricity if your heart goes out of rhythm in order to restore it to normal rhythm. But the defibrillator doesn't prevent the arrhythmias from happening, it just is there to save your life in case they do.In order to prevent the arrhythmias from actually happening, there are two mainstays of therapy. If we cannot find another reversible cause, we can either provide you with medications, and there are a variety of medications we can use. These medications are termed anti-arrhythmic drugs, and tend to be successful in as many as 50% to 60% of patients. However, they can have side effects, and in some patients they can actually cause more arrhythmias, and sometimes dangerous arrhythmias that could lead to sudden death, as well. As long as patients are properly monitored and the initiation of the drugs is properly done, however, the likelihood of this is very low. Thank you for joining me today to learn more about ventricular tachycardia. In the next video, I will go into more detail in what an ablation procedure involves.When the heart beats too fast, it may not send enough blood to the rest of the body. So the organs and tissues may not get enough oxygen. Symptoms of ventricular tachycardia are due to a lack of oxygen. They may include:Ventricular tachycardia can be a medical emergency even if your symptoms are minor.Ventricular tachycardia, sometimes called V-tach or VT, is grouped according to how long an episode lasts.Symptoms of sustained V-tach may include:Many different things can cause ventricular tachycardia, sometimes called V-tach or VT. It's important to get a fast, accurate diagnosis and appropriate care. Even if you have a healthy heart, you should get prompt medical help if you have symptoms of V-tach.Make an appointment for a health checkup if you think you have an irregular heartbeat. Sometimes, urgent or emergency care is needed.Call 911 or your local emergency number for these symptoms:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free, and receive heart transplant and heart failure content, plus expertise on heart health.ErrorSelect a locationErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You will receive the first heart failure and transplantation email in your inbox shortly. When seeking answers, people often look to experts for clear and accurate information. By subscribing to heart failure content from Mayo Clinic, you have taken an important first step in gaining knowledge and using it for your overall health and well-being.If you don't receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com. Please, try again in a couple of minutesVentricular tachycardia is caused by faulty heart signaling that makes the heart beat too fast in the lower heart chambers. The lower heart chambers are called the ventricles. The fast heart rate doesn't allow the ventricles to fill and squeeze to pump enough blood to the body.Many things can cause or lead to problems with heart signaling and trigger ventricular tachycardia. These include:Sometimes, the exact cause of ventricular tachycardia can't be determined. This is called idiopathic ventricular tachycardia.In a typical heart rhythm, a tiny cluster of cells at the sinus node sends out an electrical signal. The signal then travels through the atria to the atrioventricular (AV) node and then passes into the ventricles, causing them to contract and pump out blood.To better understand the cause of ventricular tachycardia, it may help to know how the heart works.The typical heart has four chambers.The heart's electrical system controls the heartbeat. The heart's electrical signals start in a group of cells at the top of the heart called the sinus node. They pass through a pathway between the upper and lower heart chambers called the atrioventricular (AV) node. The movement of the signals causes the heart to squeeze and pump blood.In a healthy heart, this heart signaling process usually goes smoothly, resulting in a resting heart rate of 60 to 100 beats a minute.But some things can change how electrical signals travel through the heart. In ventricular tachycardia, faulty electrical signaling in the heart's lower chambers make the heart beat100 or more times a minute.Any condition that puts a strain on the heart or damages heart tissue can increase the risk of ventricular tachycardia. Lifestyle changes such as eating healthy and not smoking may lower the risk. It's also important to get proper medical treatment if you have any of the following conditions and events:A family history of tachycardia or other heart rhythm disorders also makes a person more likely to get ventricular tachycardia.Complications of ventricular tachycardia depend on:A life-threatening complication of V-tach is ventricular fibrillation, also called V-fib. V-fib can cause all heart activity to suddenly stop, called sudden cardiac arrest. Emergency treatment is needed to prevent death. V-fib happens most often in people with heart disease or a prior heart attack. Sometimes it occurs in those who have high or low potassium levels or other changes in body mineral levels.Other possible complications of ventricular tachycardia include:Preventing ventricular tachycardia starts with keeping the heart in good shape. If you have heart disease, get regular health checkups and follow your treatment plan. Take all medicines as directed.Take the following steps to keep the heart healthy. The American Heart Association recommends these eight steps:Other lifestyle changes also can help protect heart health and may prevent irregular heartbeats:Ventricular tachycardia care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart Rhythm Conditions support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.29 Replies Tue, Jun 25, 2024 414 Replies Tue, May 28, 2024 93 Replies Thu, May 23, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Nonsustained V-tachSustained V-tachEat a balanced, nutritious diet.Get regular exercise.Maintain a healthy weight.Control blood pressure and cholesterol.Manage stress.Limit alcohol.Stop smoking.Practice good sleep habits.Limit caffeine.Don't use illegal drugs.Check medicine ingredients.Go to scheduled health checkups.Advertising & Sponsorship