A ventricular septal defect (VSD) is a hole in the heart. It's a common heart problem present at birth (congenital heart defect). The hole occurs in the wall that separates the heart's lower chambers (ventricles). A ventricular septal defect (VSD) is a hole in the heart that's present at birth (congenital heart defect). The hole is between the lower heart chambers (right and left ventricles). It allows oxygen-rich blood to move back into the lungs instead of being pumped to the rest of the body. A ventricular septal defect (VSD) changes how blood flows through the heart and lungs. Oxygen-rich blood gets pumped back to the lungs instead of out to the body. The oxygen-rich blood mixes with oxygen-poor blood. These changes may increase blood pressure in the lungs and require the heart to work harder to pump blood.A small ventricular septal defect may cause no problems. Many small ventricular septal defects (VSDs) close on their own. Babies with medium or larger VSDs may need surgery early in life to prevent complications.Symptoms of serious heart problems present at birth (congenital heart defects) often appear during the first few days, weeks or months of a child's life.Symptoms of a ventricular septal defect (VSD) depend on the size of the hole and if there are any other heart problems. A small VSD may never cause symptoms.In general, VSD symptoms in a baby may include:Symptoms of a ventricular septal defect in adults may include:Call your health care provider if your baby:Call your provider if these symptoms develop:Ventricular septal defect (VSD) occurs as the baby's heart is developing during pregnancy. The muscular wall separating the heart into left and right sides doesn't form fully, leaving one or more holes. The size of the hole or holes can vary.There's often no clear cause. Genetics and environmental factors may play a role. VSDs can occur alone or with other heart problems present at birth. Rarely, a ventricular septal defect can occur later in life after a heart attack or certain heart procedures.To understand more about ventricular septal defect (VSD), it may be helpful to know how the heart typically works. A typical heart has two upper and two lower chambers. The upper chambers, the right and left atria, receive incoming blood. The lower chambers, the more muscular right and left ventricles, pump blood out of the heart. The heart valves, which keep blood flowing in the right direction, are gates at the chamber openings. The typical heart is made of four chambers — two upper chambers (atria) and two lower chambers (ventricles).A ventricular septal defect changes the direction of blood flow in the heart and lungs. The hole lets oxygen-rich blood go back into the lungs, instead of going out to the body. Oxygen-rich blood and oxygen-poor blood now mix together. If the ventricular septal defect is large, the blood pressure in the lung arteries may increase. The heart then must work harder to pump blood. A large VSD can also increase the amount of blood flow in the lung arteries, causing congestion.Risk factors for ventricular septal defect include:A baby born with ventricular septal defect may have other heart problems, such as:If you already have a child with a congenital heart defect, a genetic counselor can discuss the risk of your next child having one.A small ventricular septal defect (VSD) may never cause any problems. Some medium or large VSDs may be life-threatening. Treatment can help prevent many complications.Complications of ventricular septal defect can include:Because the cause is unclear, it may not be possible to prevent ventricular septal defect (VSD). But getting good prenatal care is important. If you have a VSD and are planning to become pregnant, schedule a visit with your health care provider and follow these steps:If you have a family history of heart problems present at birth, consider talking with a genetic counselor and a heart doctor (cardiologist) before getting pregnant.Oct 21, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.