Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia (mak-roe-glob-u-lih-NEE-me-uh) is a type of cancer that begins in the white blood cells. Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia is considered a type of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. It's sometimes called lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma.In Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia, some white blood cells undergo changes that turn them into cancer cells. The cancer cells can build up in the spongy material inside the bones where blood cells are made. This material is called bone marrow. The cancer cells crowd healthy blood cells out of the bone marrow. Cancer cells also may build up in other parts of the body, such as the lymph nodes and the spleen.The cancer cells make a protein that can build up in the blood. Too much of the protein can reduce blood flow in the body and cause other problems.Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia grows slowly. It might not cause symptoms for years.When they happen, Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia symptoms may include:Make an appointment with your primary care provider if you have ongoing symptoms that worry you.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Subscribe for free and receive an in-depth guide to coping with cancer, plus helpful information on how to get a second opinion. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview.ErrorSelect a topicErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.Your in-depth coping with cancer guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest about cancer news, research, and care.If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.Please, try again in a couple of minutesCancer happens when cells develop changes in their DNA. A cell's DNA holds the instructions that tell a cell what to do. The changes tell the cells to multiply quickly. The cells continue living when healthy cells would die as part of their natural lifecycle.In Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia, the changes happen in the white blood cells. The changes turn some of the white blood cells into cancer cells. It's not clear what causes the changes.The cancer cells can build up in the spongy material inside the bones where blood cells are made. This material is called bone marrow. The cancer cells crowd healthy blood cells out of the bone marrow. The cancer cells also may build up in the lymph nodes and the spleen.Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia cells make a protein that the body can't use. The protein is immunoglobulin M, which is also called IgM. IgM can build up in the blood. This may reduce blood flow in the body and cause other problems.Factors that can increase the risk of Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia include:Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Blood Cancers & Disorders support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.53 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 60 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 107 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Being older.Being male.Being white.Having a family history of lymphoma.Advertising & Sponsorship