Wrinkles around the mouth, eyes and neck are common with aging. The skin in these areas gets thinner, drier and less elastic.Wrinkles are a natural part of aging. These lines and creases in the skin are most likely to form on skin that's often exposed to the sun, such as the face, neck, hands and forearms. Pollutants and smoking also speed the aging process. Using sunscreen every day and quitting smoking help prevent some wrinkling.If your wrinkles bother you, many options are available to help smooth them or make them less visible. These include medicines, skin-resurfacing techniques, fillers and surgery.With repeated sun exposure, wrinkles can become very pronounced and deep, especially on the back of the neck.Wrinkles are the lines and creases that form in your skin. Some wrinkles become deep and may be especially noticeable around the eyes, mouth and neck.If you're concerned about how your skin looks, see a doctor who specializes in the skin. This type of expert is called a dermatologist. Your doctor can assess your skin, help you create a skin care plan and discuss wrinkle treatments.Wrinkles are caused by several factors — some you can control, others you can't:Here are some tips for slowing the effects of sun exposure and other causes of wrinkles:Wash your face and moisturize. Dry skin shrivels plump skin cells, which can lead to fine lines and wrinkles. Make it a habit to gently wash your face and moisturize it every day. Moisturizing traps water in the skin.Moisturizers often have active ingredients that are intended to reduce fine lines and wrinkles. Look for ingredients such as retinol, niacinamide and vitamin C. Many such products also come with a broad-spectrum sunscreen in them. Read the product labels for when and how to apply. Products with retinol or retinoids are not for use when pregnant.Another option you can buy without a prescription is adapalene (Differin). This is a vitamin A-derived product that can help prevent fine lines and wrinkles.It may take a few weeks or even months of regular use of the product before you notice any improvement in your skin. Or you may see no change at all. Moisturizers and wrinkle creams that you can buy without a prescription aren't classified as medicine, so they aren't required to undergo scientific research to prove they work. If you're not happy with the results, talk with your healthcare team about moisturizers with prescription-strength anti-wrinkle ingredients, such as retinoids.Wrinkles care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Age.Ultraviolet (UV) radiation.Smoking and pollution.Repeated facial expressions.Family history.Protect your skin from UV radiation.Wash your face and moisturize.Don't smoke.Eat a healthy diet.Advertising & Sponsorship