X-linked agammaglobulinemia (a-gam-uh-glob-u-lih-NEE-me-uh), also called XLA, is an immune system disorder that's passed through families, called inherited. XLA makes it hard to fight infections. People with XLA might get infections of the inner ear, sinuses, respiratory tract, bloodstream and internal organs.XLA almost always affects males. But females can carry the genes linked to the condition. Most people with XLA are diagnosed in infancy or early childhood, after they've had repeated infections. Some people aren't diagnosed until they're adults.Most babies with XLA appear healthy for the first few months. They're protected by the proteins called antibodies they got from their mothers before birth.When these antibodies leave their systems, the babies begin to get repeat bacterial infections. The infections can be life-threatening. Infections might involve the ears, lungs, sinuses and skin.Male infants born with XLA have:Women can pass down X-linked recessive disorders such as X-linked agammaglobulinemia. Women who are carriers of an X-linked recessive disorder have a 25% chance of having an unaffected son, a 25% chance of having an affected son, a 25% chance of having an unaffected daughter and a 25% chance of having a daughter who also is a carrier.X-linked agammaglobulinemia is caused by a change in a gene. People with the condition can't produce proteins called antibodies that fight infection. About 40% of people with the condition have a family member who has it.People with XLA can live mostly typical lives. They should try to take part in regular activities for their ages. But repeat infections linked to XLA will likely need careful watching and treatment. They can damage organs and be life-threatening.Possible complications include:X-linked agammaglobulinemia care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Blood Cancers & Disorders support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.53 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 60 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 107 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship