In Zenker's diverticulum, a bulge or a pouch forms at the top of the esophagus, as shown in the image on the far right. A typical esophagus is shown on the left.In Zenker's diverticulum, a bulge or pouch forms at the top of the tube that connects the throat to the stomach, called the esophagus. The condition is not common. Connected bands of muscle that work to pass food from the mouth to the stomach make up the esophagus.Over time, the bulge of Zenker's diverticulum can get bigger. Food, pills and even thick mucus can get stuck in the pouch instead of going through the esophagus. This can lead to problems with eating and other complications.The cause of Zenker's diverticulum is not known. It happens most often to men older than 60. Treatment for symptoms of Zenker's diverticulum often is surgery.A small Zenker's diverticulum may not have any symptoms. But the bulge may get bigger over time. It can trap food, mucus and pills. Symptoms might include:If the pouch gets big enough, what's in it may spill into the throat. Then Zenker's diverticulum symptoms might include:The cause of Zenker's diverticulum isn't known. It's not known why the walls of the esophagus change to form a bulge or pouch in the condition.The cause of Zenker's diverticulum might involve the muscles of the esophagus not working together. Most often, a muscle at the top of the esophagus relaxes to let the food down. If that doesn't happen, food can get trapped in the esophagus.If the muscle in the area where the food gets trapped is weak, the food can cause the esophagus to bulge and form a pouch.Risk factors for Zenker's diverticulum include:Complications can happen if Zenker's diverticulum isn't treated. The bulge of Zenker's diverticulum can get larger if it's not treated. Complications of Zenker's diverticulum can include:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Lung infection.Weight loss and not getting enough nutrients, called malnutrition.Advertising & Sponsorship