Water accounts for about one half to two thirds of an average person s weight . Fat tissue has a lower percentage of water than lean tissue and women tend to have more fat so the percentage of body weight that is water in the average woman is lower 52 to 55 than it is in the average man 60 . The percentage of body weight that is water is also lower in older adults and in people with obesity . The percentage of body weight that is water is higher 70 at birth and in early childhood .A 154 pound 70 kilogram man has a little over 10 . 5 gallons 42 liters of water in his body 7 gallons 28 liters inside the cells 2 . 5 gallons about 10 . 5 liters in the space around the cells and slightly less than 1 gallon 3 . 5 liters or about 8 of the total amount of water in the blood .Water intake must balance water loss . To maintain water balance and to protect againstdehydrationthe development ofkidney stonesand other medical problems healthy adults should drink at least to 2 quarts about 2 liters of fluids a day . Drinking too much is usually better than drinking too little because excreting excess water is much easier for the body than conserving water . However when the kidneys are functioning normally the body can handle wide variations in fluid intake .Did You Know . . .When the kidneys are functioning normally the body can handle wide variations in fluid intake .Thebody obtains waterprimarily by absorbing it from the digestive tract from food or beverages . Additionally a small amount of water is produced when the body processes metabolizes certain nutrients .Thebody loses waterprimarily by excreting it in urine from the kidneys the blood is filtered by the kidneys and some water is removed for excretion . Depending on the body s needs the kidneys may excrete less than a pint or up to several gallons about half a liter to over 10 liters of urine a day . About pints a little less than a liter of water are lost daily when water evaporates from the skin and is breathed out by the lungs . Profuse sweating which may be caused by vigorous exercise hot weather or a high body temperature can dramatically increase the amount of water lost through evaporation . Normally little water is lost from the digestive tract . However prolonged vomiting or severe diarrhea can result in the loss of a gallon or more a day .Usually people can drink enough fluids to compensate for excess water loss . However people who have severevomitingordiarrheamay feel too ill to drink enough fluids to compensate for water loss anddehydrationmay result . Also confusion restricted mobility or impaired consciousness can prevent people from sensing thirst or being able to drink enough fluids .Mineral saltselectrolytessuch as sodium and potassium are dissolved in the water in the body . Water balance andelectrolyte balanceare closely linked . The body works to keep the total amount of water and the levels of electrolytes in the blood constant . For example when the sodium level becomes too high thirst develops leading to an increased intake of fluids . In additionvasopressinalso called antidiuretic hormone a hormone secreted by the pituitary gland a pea sized gland at the base of the brain in response to dehydration causes the kidneys to excrete less water . The combined effect is an increased amount of water in the blood . As a result sodium is diluted and the balance of sodium and water is restored . When the sodium level becomes too low the kidneys excrete more water which decreases the amount of water in the blood again restoring the balance .In the body several mechanisms work together to maintain water balance . These includeThirstInteraction of the pituitary gland and kidneysOsmosisThirstis one of the most important mechanisms to maintain water balance . When the body needs water nerve centers deep within the brain are stimulated resulting in the sensation of thirst . The sensation becomes stronger as the body s need for water increases motivating a person to drink the needed fluids . When the body has excess water thirst is suppressed .An interaction between the pituitary gland and the kidneysprovides another mechanism . When the body is low in water the pituitary gland secretesvasopressinalso called antidiuretic hormone into the bloodstream .Vasopressinstimulates the kidneys to conserve water and excrete less urine . When the body has excess water the pituitary gland secretes littlevasopressinenabling the kidneys to excrete excess water in the urine .Inosmosiswater flows passively from one area or compartment of the body to another . This passive flow allows the larger volumes of fluid in the cells and the area around the cells to act as reservoirs to protect the more critical but smaller volume of fluid in the blood vessels fromdehydration.