Black cohoshis a perennial plant that grows in North America and is most commonly used as a dietary supplement to relievesymptoms of menopause. Although it is used to produceestrogenlike effects it does not contain any plantestrogens.Its botanical name isActaea racemosaand it is also known as black bugbane and black snakeroot among other names .The underground stem of this plant is available in powder tablet or liquid form .Black cohoshsupplements should be manufactured to contain certain active ingredients called triterpenes .Black cohoshSee alsoOverview of Dietary Supplements.Claims forPeople most often takeblack cohoshformenopausal symptomssuch as hot flashes night sweats mood swings rapid heart rate and vaginal dryness . People sometimes takeblack cohoshto treat arthritis or to treat menstrual symptoms .Evidence forScientific evidence regarding benefit in relieving menopausal symptoms is conflicting . Some studies show thatblack cohoshrelieves menopausal symptoms somewhat but not as effectively as hormonal treatments . However other studies found no difference betweenblack cohoshandplacebosubstances that do not contain an active ingredient in relief of hot flashes or menopausal symptom scores . One difficulty is that the ingredients inblack cohoshsupplements are not standardized .There are few reliable data on the effectiveness ofblack cohoshfor other disorders and symptoms .Side Effects ofSide effects are uncommon . The most likely are headache rash and stomach discomfort .Black cohoshmay also cause dizziness excessive sweating and in high doses low blood pressure .Because a few people have developed liver problems the U . S . Pharmacopeia USP has recommended thatblack cohoshproducts be labeled with a warning that they may be toxic to the liver .Drug Interactions withblack cohoshRecommendations forBlack cohoshmay help alleviate menopausal symptoms but any possible benefit is likely to be small . The North American Menopause Society does not recommend its use because the evidence supporting its use is of low quality . Conventional treatments for example hormonal treatments have greater benefits .Black cohoshblack cohosh. Pregnant and breastfeeding women should avoid its use .More InformationThe following English language resource may be useful . Please note that THE MANUAL is not responsible for the content of this resource .National Institutes of Health s National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health