Despite the strong vaccine safety systems in place in the United States some parents remain concerned about the use andscheduleof vaccines in children . These concerns can lead some parents to vaccine hesitancy . Vaccine hesitancy is when parents delay or do not allow their children to be given some or all of the recommended vaccines despite the availability of vaccine services . Diseases that can be prevented by vaccines are much more likely to develop in children whose parents have refused one or more vaccines .Children in the United States who do not receive routine vaccinations still become very sick and sometimes die from vaccine preventable diseases . For example before a vaccine was developedHaemophilus influenzaetype b Hib was the leading cause of bacterial meningitis in children which can cause brain damage or deafness . Hib infection which before the vaccine occurred in about 20 000 children each year is now rare in the United States . From 2009 to 2018 there were only 36 severe cases in children younger than 5 years of age and 26 of theses cases were in children who were unvaccinated or not fully vaccinated see.COVID 19 VaccinesTheCOVID 19 pandemicbrought vaccine hesitancy back to the forefront . The firstCOVID 19 vaccinereceived Emergency Use Authorization EUA from the U . S . Food and Drug Administration FDA in December 2020 . Since that time hundreds of millions of Americans have received at least one COVID 19 vaccine dose . However many people remain unvaccinated . Similar to other vaccine preventable diseases COVID 19 hospitalizations and deaths are much more common among unvaccinated people . In addition serious side effects associated with COVID 19 vaccination are extremely rare fewer than 10 cases per million vaccinations .Some parents think that COVID 19 infection is not dangerous to children but this is not the case . Although COVID 19 infection is typically milder in children than adults it can cause serious problems and death . As of May 2023 more than 15 million children in the United States were reported to have tested positive for COVID 19 since the onset of the pandemic resulting in 1 839 deaths . Additionally COVID 19 can lead tomultisystem inflammatory syndrome in childrenMIS C a rare but serious condition diagnosed in nearly 10 000 children resulting in 79 deaths as of May 31 2023 . As in adults hospitalization is more frequent in unvaccinated versus vaccinated adolescents . Also children may develop long lasting problemslong COVIDeven if the COVID 19 infection was mild or did not cause symptoms . Research suggests that people who get a COVID 19 infection after vaccination are less likely to report long COVID compared to people who are unvaccinated see.Measles Mumps Rubella MMR Vaccine Concerns about AutismIn the 1990s the public press reported concerns that theMMR vaccinemay causeautism. These concerns were based on a fraudulent and brief medical report in 1998 about 12 children . Their parents reported that eight of the children had received the MMR vaccine within a month before they developed symptoms . Because this chain of events could also have occurred by chance doctors have since done many studies to look for a connection between the vaccine and autism . No such connection was found in any of the many studies .The largest of these studies looked at 537 303 Danish children who were born between 1991 and 1998 . Most 82 of these children had been given the MMR vaccine . Doctors found thatThe children who had been vaccinated were no more likely to develop autism than those who were not vaccinated .Autism or a related disorder occurred in 608 of 440 655 0 . 138 children who were vaccinated and in 130 of 96 648 0 . 135 of those who were not vaccinated . The percentage of children who became autistic is nearly identical in the group that was vaccinated and the group that was not vaccinated . A follow up study of all children born in Denmark between 1999 and 2010 a total of 657 461 children concluded that MMR does not cause autism overall nor does it increase the risk in children who are at high risk of autism because of their family history .Other similar studies from across the world have reached similar conclusions . In addition the research in the original widely publicized study linking autism and the MMR vaccine has been found to have serious scientific flaws and has been discredited by the medical and scientific communities .Despite the overwhelming evidence to support the safety of the MMR vaccines many parents unfortunately remain unconvinced . As a result in 2019 the United States experienced its largest measles outbreak since 1992 . According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention CDC most of the infected people were not vaccinated see.Thimerosal Concerns about AutismPeople have also been concerned about possible side effects of thimerosal . Thimerosal was previously used as a preservative in vials that contain more than one dose of a vaccine multidose vials . Preservatives are not needed in vials that contain only one dose single dose vials and they cannot be used in live virus vaccines such as rubella and varicella . Thimerosal which contains mercury is broken down by the body intoethylmercury which is eliminated quickly from the body . Becausemethylmercury which is a different compound that is not eliminated from the body quickly is toxic to humans there was concern that the very small amounts of thimerosal used in vaccines might cause neurologic problems particularly autism in children .The World Health Organization WHO has not recommended thimerosal be removed from any vaccines because there is no evidence that routine use causes any harm . However because of theoretical concerns and even though no studies had shown evidence of harm thimerosal was removed from routine childhood vaccines in the United States Europe and several other countries by 2001 . In these countries small amounts of thimerosal continue to be used in certain influenza vaccines as well as in several vaccines intended for use in adults . Yearly flu vaccines are recommended for all children and parents who are worried about thimerosal can ask for a flu vaccine that does not contain thimerosal . See also.The removal of thimerosal from routine childhood vaccines has had no effect on the number of children who have developed autism .Use of Several Vaccines at the Same TimeAccording to the CDC s recommended vaccination schedule children should be given several doses of vaccines against 10 or more different infections by age 6 years . To minimize the number of injections and visits clinicians give many vaccines in combination such as thediphtheria tetanus pertussis vaccineand others .However some parents worry that the children s immune system cannot handle so many antigens given at once . Antigens are the substances in vaccines that are derived from the virus or bacteria and that cause the body s immune system to produce antibodies to fight disease . Sometimes parents who are worried ask for a different vaccine schedule or ask to delay or exclude certain vaccines . However the recommended schedule is designed to give the various vaccines at the ages when children begin to need protection against the diseases . Thus not following the schedule puts children at increased risk of infection . Furthermore because current vaccines contain fewer antigens overall because key antigens have been better identified and purified children are exposed to fewer vaccine antigens today than they were for most of the 20th century .Also vaccines even combination vaccines contain very few antigens compared to what people encounter in daily life . Starting at birth children encounter dozens and possibly hundreds of antigens during a single ordinary day . Their immune system handles these antigens without difficulty . Even a mild cold exposes children to 4 to 10 virus antigens . A child s immune system is not stressed or overwhelmed by combination vaccinations . See also.Effects of Vaccine Refusal on Public HealthDelaying or refusing vaccines affects public health . When fewer people are vaccinated the percentage of a population that is immune to disease decreases . Then the disease becomes more common particularly among people who are at increased risk of getting a disease .People may be at increased risk becauseThey were vaccinated but did not become immune .They were vaccinated but their immunity has decreased over time as may occur as people age .Their immune system is impaired by a disorder or a medication such as the medications used to treat cancer or prevent rejection of a transplant and they cannot be given live virus vaccines such as the MMR or varicella vaccine .