Vaccination protects children against many infectious diseases . Vaccines contain either noninfectious components of bacteria or viruses or whole forms of these organisms that have been weakened so that they do not cause disease . Giving a vaccine usually by injection stimulates the body s immune system to defend against that disease . Vaccination is also called immunization because it produces a state of immunity to disease see alsoOverview of Immunization.Childhood Vaccination SchedulesIn the United States childhood vaccination follows a schedule recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention CDC which begins with thehepatitis B vaccinegiven in the hospital nursery and continues throughout childhoodParents should try to have their children vaccinated according to the schedule . A significant delay in vaccination puts children at risk of the serious diseases the vaccines could prevent . If children miss a vaccine dose parents should talk to their doctor about catching up with the schedule . Missing a dose does not require children to restart the series of injections from the beginning . The following schedule is used to catch up when behind on vaccinationsVaccination does not need to be delayed if children have a slight fever resulting from a mild infection such as an ordinary cold .Some vaccines are recommended only under special circumstances for example only when children have an increased risk of getting the disease the vaccine prevents .More than one vaccine may be given during a visit to the doctor s office and several vaccines are often combined into one injection . For example there is a vaccine that combines pertussis diphtheria tetanus polio andHaemophilus influenzaetype b vaccines in one injection . A combination vaccine simply reduces the number of injections needed and does not reduce the safety or effectiveness of the vaccines . See also.Vaccine EffectivenessVaccination is effective in preventing serious disease . Without vaccines children are at risk of becoming seriously ill or even dying from diseases such as measles and whooping cough . Vaccines have been so effective that many health care professionals currently in practice have seen few or no cases of diseases that were once extremely common and often fatal see.Vaccines have eliminatedsmallpoxand have nearly eliminated other infections such aspoliothat were once common causes of chronic health issues or death in children . However many of the diseases prevented by vaccination are still present in the United States and remain common in some parts of the world . These infections can spread rapidly among unvaccinated children who because of the ease of modern travel can be exposed even if they live in areas where a disease is not common . Therefore it is important for children to continue to be vaccinated .Vaccine SafetyVaccines that are approved for clinical use are generally safe and effective . No vaccine or other medication is 100 effective and 100 safe . A few vaccinated children do not become immune and a few develop side effects . Most often the side effects are minor such as pain and redness at the injection site a rash or a mild fever . Very rarely there are more serious problems .Before a new vaccine can be licensed it like any medical product is tested inclinical trials. Such trials compare the new vaccine to a placebo or to a previously existing vaccine for the same disease to assess whether the vaccine is effective and identify common side effects . However some side effects are too rare to be detected in any reasonably sized clinical trial and do not become apparent until after a vaccine is used routinely in many people . Thus a surveillance system called the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System seewas created to monitor the safety of vaccines that are used in the general public .VAERS is a safety program cosponsored by the U . S . Food and Drug Administration FDA and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention CDC . It is used to collect reports from people who believe that they had a side effect after a recent vaccination and from health care professionals who identify certain possible side effects after a vaccine was given even if they are unsure the effects are related to the vaccine . Thus the existence of a VAERS report is not proof that a vaccine caused a certain side effect . VAERS is simply a system for collecting data about things thatmightbe side effects . Then the FDA can further evaluate the concern by comparing how often the possible side effect occurred in people who were vaccinated to how often it occurred in people who were not vaccinated .To help people evaluate the risks and benefits of vaccination the US government requires doctors to give parents aeach time a child is vaccinated . Also thehas been established to compensate people with proven vaccine related injuries . This program was established because doctors and health authorities want as many children as possible to be protected from life threatening diseases .When considering the risks and benefits of vaccination parents must remember that for most children the benefits of vaccination far outweigh the risks .More InformationThe following English language resources may be useful . Please note that THE MANUAL is not responsible for the content of these resources .Information about vaccines and immunization schedules for infants children and adolescentsInformation about vaccines broken down by age from birth through age 18 yearsA resource providing information regarding all aspects of vaccine safety including safety monitoring and researchInformation about why it is important to have children vaccinatedWhere and how to report side effects of vaccinesWhere and how to claim a vaccine injury benefitVaccine schedules in all countries in the European Union European Economic Area