Many adolescents engage in sexual activity but may not be fully informed aboutcontraceptionpregnancyandsexually transmitted infectionsincludinghepatitis Candhuman immunodeficiency virus HIV infection. Impulsivity lack of planning and concurrent drug and alcohol use decrease the likelihood that adolescents will use birth control and barrier protection such as condoms .See alsoIntroduction to Problems in Adolescents.Any of the adultcontraceptive methodsmay be used by adolescents but the most common problem is adherence . For example some adolescent girls forget to takebirth control pillsevery day or stop taking them entirely and may not substitute another form of birth control . Although male condoms are the most frequently used form of contraception there are still perceptions that may inhibit consistent use . For example adolescents may think condoms decrease pleasure and interfere with romantic love . Some adolescents also are shy about asking partners to use condoms during sex . Longer term forms of contraception such as intrauterine devicesIUDshormonal injectionsthat last 3 months or longer orimplants under the skinthat may be effective for several years are popular with adolescent girls .Pregnancy can be a source of significant emotional stress for adolescents .Pregnant adolescents and their partners tend to drop out of school or job training thus worsening their economic status lowering their self esteem and straining personal relationships . Pregnant adolescents are less likely than adults to get prenatal care resulting in poorer pregnancy outcomes such as higher rates ofpremature birth. Pregnant adolescents particularly the very young and those who are not receiving prenatal care are more likely than women in their 20s to have medical problems such asanemiawhen the body does not have enough healthy red blood cells andpreeclampsiahigh blood pressure and protein in the urine that can stress the fetus .Infants born to younger adolescents especially those under 15 years of age are more likely to be born prematurely and to have a low birth weight . However with proper prenatal care older adolescents have no higher risk of pregnancy problems than adults from similar social and economic backgrounds .A pregnant adolescent may choose to continue orterminatethe pregnancy . An adolescent may raise the child herself or together with the child s father possibly with support of family members or may give up a child voluntarilyadoption.All of the options may cause emotional stress . Counseling for both the girl and her partner can be very helpful . Counseling should also include education about use of contraception after the pregnancy .An adolescent s parents may have different reactions when their child is pregnant or has impregnated someone . Emotions may range from distress to excitement apathy disappointment or anger . It is important for parents to express their support and willingness to help the adolescent sort through their choices . Parents and adolescents need to communicate openly about abortion adoption and parenthood which are all tough options for adolescents to struggle with alone .