Decreased libido is a reduction in sex drive .Possible causes include psychologic factors such as depression anxiety or relationship problems drugs and low blood levels oftestosterone.Depending on the cause doctors may suggest psychologic counseling prescribe a different drug or recommendtestosteronesupplementation therapy .See alsoOverview of Sexual Dysfunction in Men.Sex drive libido varies greatly among men and may be decreased temporarily by conditions such as fatigue or anxiety . Libido also tends to gradually decrease as a man ages . Persistently low libido may cause distress to a couple .Occasionally low libido can be a life long problem that results from traumatic childhood sexual experiences or from learned suppression of sexual thoughts . Most often however low libido develops after years of normal sexual desire . Psychologic factors such as depression anxiety and relationship problems are often the cause .Chronic kidney diseasecan decrease libido . Some drugs such as those used to treat depression anxiety or advancedprostate cancercan decrease blood levels oftestosteroneand also lower libido .When libido is decreased men have fewer sexual thoughts and fantasies and less interest in sex and they engage in sexual activity less frequently . Even sexual stimulation by sights words or touch may fail to provoke interest . Men with low libido often retain the capacity for sexual function and may sometimes continue to engage in sexual activity to satisfy their partner .A blood test can measure the level oftestosteronein the blood . The diagnosis of lowtestosteronecalled hypogonadism is based both on the man s description of his symptoms and his low blood levels oftestosterone.Treatment of Decreased Libido in MenCounselingIf the cause is psychologic various psychologic therapies including behavioral therapies can help . Counseling can help the couple address relationship issues . Men should also understand the role of stress and its impact on physical function .If thetestosteronelevel is lowtestosteroneis low . If a drug appears to be the cause of lowtestosteronelevels a doctor may consider treating the man with a different drug .