Dehydration is a deficiency of water in the body .Vomiting diarrhea excessive sweating burns kidney failure and use of diuretics may cause dehydration .People feel thirsty and as dehydration worsens they may sweat less and excrete less urine .If dehydration is severe people may be confused or feel light headed .Treatment is restoring lost water and mineral salts such as sodium and potassium that are dissolved in the blood electrolytes usually by drinking but sometimes with intravenous fluids .See alsoAbout Body Water.Dehydration occurs when the body loses more water than it takes in .Vomitingdiarrheathe use of medications that increase urine excretion diuretics profuse sweating for example during heat waves particularly with prolonged exertion and decreased water intake can lead to dehydration .Dehydration is particularly common among older adults because their thirst center may not function as well as that in younger people . Therefore some older people may not recognize that they are becoming dehydrated . Certain disorders such asdiabetes mellitusandAddison diseasecan increase the excretion of urine and thereby lead to dehydration .Dehydration in infants and childrenis also common because the amount of fluid lost during diarrhea or vomiting may represent a larger proportion of their body fluids than in older children and adults .Symptoms of DehydrationAt first dehydration stimulates the thirst center of the brain causing thirst a powerful motivator for people to drink more fluids . If water intake does not keep up with water loss dehydration becomes more severe . Sweating decreases and less urine is excreted . Water moves from inside the cells to the bloodstream to maintain the needed amount of blood blood volume and blood pressure seeAbout Body Water. If dehydration continues tissues of the body begin to dry out and cells begin to shrivel and malfunction .Symptoms ofmild to moderate dehydrationincludeThirstReduced sweatingReduced skin elasticityReduced urine productionDry mouthInseveredehydration the sensation of thirst may actually decrease and blood pressure can fall causing light headedness or fainting particularly upon standing a condition calledorthostatic hypotension. If dehydration continuesshockand severe damage to internal organs such as the kidneys liver and brain occur . Brain cells are particularly susceptible to more severe levels of dehydration . Consequently confusion is one of the best indicators that dehydration has become severe . Very severe dehydration can lead to coma and death .Spotlight on Aging Water BalanceDehydrationOlder adults are particularly susceptible to dehydration . Common causes of dehydration includeDementiaor other mental conditions that diminish people s ability to care for themselvesDisorders that make obtaining fluids difficult usually because of restricted mobility such as after astrokeAdditionally older adults sense thirst more slowly and less intensely than younger people do so even those who are otherwise well may not drink enough fluids .Some older adults also may drink less because of not wanting to wake up during the night to use the bathroom or because ofincontinenceor the fear of incontinence .Older adults have a higher percentage of body fat . Because fat tissue contains less water than lean tissue the total amount of water in the body tends to decrease with age .OverhydrationInoverhydrationthe body contains too much water . In older adults the kidneys excrete excess water less efficiently and thus older adults can develop overhydration more easily than younger people do .Swellingedema may or may not occur .Diagnosis of DehydrationA doctor s evaluationSometimes blood testsDehydration can often be diagnosed from symptoms and the results of a doctor s examination . But sometimes doctors do blood tests for people who appear seriously ill or who take certain medications or have certain disorders . For people who require more monitoring or testing in an emergency department or intensive care unit doctors sometimes use ultrasound or special catheters to measure the severity of dehydration .Dehydration normally causes the sodium level in the blood to increase . The reason is that although the common causes of dehydration such asprofuse sweatingvomitinganddiarrhearesult in a loss ofelectrolytesespecially sodium and potassium even more water is lost so sodium becomes more concentrated in the blood .Treatment of DehydrationReplacing fluids and electrolytesFor treating mild dehydration drinking plenty of water may be all that is needed . With moderate and severe dehydration lost electrolytes especially sodium and potassium must also be replaced .Oral rehydration solutionsthat contain appropriate amounts of electrolytes are available without a prescription . These solutions work well to treat dehydration especially that caused by vomiting or diarrhea in children . Sports drinks do not necessarily contain enough electrolytes to be an adequate substitute for these solutions .People who are vomiting may not be able to hold down enough fluid to treat dehydration . More severe dehydration requires treatment with intravenous solutions containingsodium chloridesalt . Doctors give the intravenous solution rapidly at first and then more slowly as the person s physical condition improves .Treatment is also directed at the cause of dehydration . For example when people havenausea and vomitingordiarrheamedications to control or stop the vomiting or diarrhea may be used .Prevention of DehydrationPrevention of dehydration is better than cure . Adults should drink at least 6 glasses of fluids daily including fluid from eating foods high in water content such as fruits and vegetables . Fluid intake should be increased on hot days when working or exercising in hot weather during or after prolonged exercise and if possible when experiencing vomiting and or diarrhea .Exercise a high body temperature and hot weather increase the body s need for water . Some sports drinks have been formulated to replace electrolytes lost during vigorous exercise . These drinks can be used to prevent dehydration . People should drink fluids with electrolytes before and during vigorous exercise as well as afterward . Before exercising people with heart or kidney disorders should consult their doctors about how to safely replace fluids .People should make sure that older family members have access to plenty of water when they are alone in a hot room car or other location .