Dehydroepiandrosterone DHEA is a steroid produced in the adrenal glands and converted into sex hormonesestrogensand androgens . DHEA s effects on the body are similar to those oftestosterone. DHEA can be synthesized from some ingredients in the Mexican yam but eating this plant is not recommended because the human body cannot convert the ingredients to DHEA .A synthetic version of DHEA is available as a tablet capsule powder topical cream and gel .See alsoOverview of Dietary Supplements.Claims for DHEAPeople take DHEA supplements to improve mood energy sense of well being and the ability to function well under stress . Other uses include the followingIncreasing sex driveDeepening nightly sleepLowering cholesterol levelsIncreasing muscle strength and bone mineral densityDecreasing body fatRelieving depressionImproving the appearance of aging skinTreating infertility in women undergoing assisted reproductionA prescription DHEA ovule or suppository has been used to treat vaginal atrophy .In older men body fat may be reduced . In older women with decreased adrenal gland function DHEA may improve quality of life and depression although there are probably more effective complementary and alternative medicine treatments .Advocates also claim that DHEA can reverse aging improve brain function in people withAlzheimer diseaseand decrease symptoms ofsystemic lupus erythematosuslupus .Many athletes claim that DHEA builds muscle and enhances athletic performance but the use of DHEA is banned by numerous professional sports organizations .Evidence for DHEAMany of the medicinal claims of DHEA have not been proved . However some evidence indicates that it may relieve depression although not as a first line treatment improve appearance of aging skin and improve fertility in women undergoing assisted reproduction .Studies found little evidence of a beneficial effect of DHEA supplementation on cognitive function of middle aged or older people who do not have dementia .Side Effects of DHEATheoretically DHEA may result in acne headache mood changes breast enlargement in men and hairiness in women . It may decrease HDL cholesterol the good cholesterol increase triglycerides and worsenpolycystic ovary syndromePCOS . It also may stimulate the growth of prostate liver and breast cancers . However these effects have not been substantiated .Drug Interactions with DHEARecommendations for DHEADHEA supplements are usually not recommended because the claimed benefits have not been proven and harmful side effects as well as several drug interactions are possible . Use by athletes is typically banned . Children should not use DHEA .