Depressionincludes a feeling of sadness or in children and adolescents irritability and or loss of interest in activities . Inmajor depressionthese symptoms last 2 weeks or more and interfere with functioning or cause considerable distress . Symptoms may follow a recent loss or other sad event but are out of proportion to that event and persist beyond an appropriate length of time .Mood dysregulation disorderinvolves persistent irritability and frequent episodes of behavior that is very out of control .Physical disorders life experiences and heredity can contribute to depression .Children and adolescents with depression may be sad disinterested and sluggish or overactive aggressive and irritable .Children with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder have frequent severe temper outbursts and between outbursts are irritable and angry .Doctors base the diagnosis on symptoms as reported by the child parents and teachers and do tests to check for other disorders that can be causing the symptoms .For adolescents with depression a combination of psychotherapy and antidepressants is usually most effective but for younger children psychotherapy alone is usually tried first .See alsoDepressionin adults .Sadness and unhappiness are common human emotions particularly in response to troubling situations . For children and adolescents such situations may include the death of a parent divorce a friend moving away difficulty adjusting to school and difficulty making friends . However feelings of sadness are sometimes out of proportion to the event or persist far longer than expected . In such cases particularly if the feelings cause difficulties in day to day functioning children may have depression . Like adults some children become depressed even when no unhappy life events occur . Such children are more likely to have family members with mood disorders a family history .Depression occurs in as many as 2 of children and 5 of adolescents .Depression includes several disordersMajor depressive disorderDisruptive mood dysregulation disorderPersistent depressive disorder dysthymiaDid You Know . . .Some children with depression are overactive and irritable rather than sad .CausesDoctors do not know exactly what causes depression but chemical abnormalities in the brain are probably involved . Some tendency to develop depression is inherited . A combination of factors including life experiences such as a loss early in life abuse injury domestic violence or having lived through a natural disaster and a genetic tendency vulnerability all seem to contribute .Sometimes another disorder such as anunderactive thyroid glandorsubstance use disorderis part of the cause . Some adolescents with persistent depression were found to have low levels offolatea vitamin in the fluid that surrounds the brain and spinal cord cerebrospinal fluid .During the COVID 19 pandemic symptoms of depression doubled in young people especially in older adolescents . Mental health visits for depression also increased . After controlling for gender age and pre COVID depressive symptoms the following were found to predict COVID 19 depressive symptoms in childrenConnectedness to caregiverScreen timeSymptomsAs in adults the severity of depression in children varies greatly .Children with major depressive disorder have an episode of depression that lasts 2 weeks or more .Children typically have feelings of overwhelming sadness or irritability worthlessness and guilt . They lose interest in activities that normally give them pleasure such as playing sports watching television playing video games or playing with friends . They may profess intense boredom . Many of these children also complain of physical problems such as stomachache or headache .Appetite may increase or decrease often leading to substantial changes in weight . Growing children may not gain weight as expected .Sleep is usually disturbed . Children may have insomnia sleep too much or be troubled by frequent nightmares .Depressed children are often not energetic or physically active . However some particularly younger children have seemingly contradictory symptoms such as overactivity and aggressive behavior . These children may seem more irritable than sad .Symptoms typically interfere with the ability to think and concentrate and schoolwork usually suffers . They may lose friends . Children may have suicidal thoughts and fantasies and may even attempt suicide .Even without treatment children with major depressive disorder may get better in 6 to 12 months . However the disorder often recurs particularly if the first episode was severe or occurred when children were young .Symptoms of Depression in ChildrenFeeling sad or irritableHaving no interest in favorite activitiesWithdrawing from friends and social situationsBeing unable to enjoy thingsFeeling rejected and unloved or worthlessFeeling fatigued or without any energyNot sleeping well and having nightmares or sleeping too muchBlaming themselvesLosing their appetite and weightHaving problems thinking concentrating and making choicesThinking about death and or suicideGiving away valued possessionsComplaining of new physical symptomsMaking lower grades in schoolChildren with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder are irritable most of the time for a long time and their behavior is frequently out of control . They have frequent severe temper outbursts that are much more intense and last much longer than the situation merits . During these outbursts they may destroy property or physically hurt others . Between outbursts children are irritable or angry most of the day nearly every day . This disorder usually begins when children are 6 to 10 years old .Many of these children also have other disorders such asOppositional defiant disorderAttention deficit hyperactivity disorderADHDAnanxiety disorderWhen these children become adults they may develop depression or an anxiety disorder .Because these children sometimes appear out of control doctors often used to diagnose them as havingbipolar disorder. However doctors now realize that this disorder is not bipolar disorder .This disorder resembles major depressive disorder but symptoms are not usually as intense and last a year or longer .DiagnosisA visit with a doctor or behavioral health specialistSometimes questionnaires about symptomsTo diagnose depression doctors rely on several sources of information including an interview with the child or adolescent and information from parents and teachers . Sometimes doctors usestructured questionnairesto help distinguish depression from a normal reaction to an unhappy situation .Doctors diagnose a depressive disorder when children or adolescents have one or both of the followingA feeling of sadness or irritabilityLoss of interest or pleasure in almost all activities often expressed as boredomAlso children must have had these symptoms most of the day nearly every day during the same 2 week period and they must have other symptoms of depression such as loss of appetite and weight and problems sleeping .Doctors try to find out whether family or social stresses may have precipitated the depression . Doctors also ask specifically about suicidal behavior including thoughts and talk about suicide .Doctors do tests to determine whether an abnormal thyroid gland or a substance use disorder is the cause of the symptoms .If adolescents have depression that persists and does not respond to usual treatments doctors may do a spinal tap to check for a deficiency of folate in cerebrospinal fluid .TreatmentFor most adolescents psychotherapy and antidepressantsFor younger children psychotherapy followed if needed by antidepressantsGuidance for family members and school staffTreatment of depressive disorders depends on the severity of symptoms . Any child who has suicidal thoughts should be closely supervised by experienced mental health care professionals . If risk of suicide is high enough children require brief hospitalization to keep them safe .For most adolescents a combination ofpsychotherapyandmedicationsis more effective than either alone . But for younger children treatment is less clear . Psychotherapy alone may be tried first and medications are used only if needed . Individual psychotherapy group therapy and family therapy may be beneficial . Doctors also advise family members and the school on how they can help children continue to function and learn .Antidepressant medicationshelp correct chemical imbalances in the brain .Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitorsIn children as in adults depression often recurs . Children and adolescents should be treated for at least 1 year after symptoms have disappeared . If children have had two or more episodes of major depression they may be treated indefinitely .There has been concern that antidepressants may cause a slight increase in the risk ofsuicidal thinking and behavior in children and adolescents. This concern led to an overall decrease in the use of antidepressants in children . However this decrease in the use of antidepressants has been associated with an increase in the rate of death by suicide perhaps because depression is then not adequately treated in some children .Studies have been done to try to settle this issue . They found that suicidal thought and attempts may increase very slightly in children who take antidepressants . However most doctors believe that the benefits outweigh the risks and that children with depression often benefit from drug treatment as long as doctors and family members are alert for worsening symptoms or suicidal thoughts .Whether or not medications are used the possibility of suicide is always a concern in any child or adolescent with depression . The following can help reduce the riskParents and mental health care professionals should talk about the issues in depth .The child or adolescent should be supervised appropriately .Regular psychotherapy sessions should be included in the treatment plan .In very severe depression psychotic symptoms may emerge for example delusions hallucinations and disorganized thinking and speech . These require treatment with a class of medications calledantipsychotics.