Some eating problems are behavioral in nature . Parents of young children often are concerned that their children are picky eaters not eating enough or eating too much eating the wrong foods refusing to eat certain foods see alsoAvoidant Restrictive Food Intake Disorderor engaging in inappropriate mealtime behavior such as sneaking food to a pet or throwing or intentionally dropping food .Most eating problems do not last long enough to interfere with a child s growth and development .Growth chartscan help parents determine whether their children s growth rate is of concern .Parents should consult a doctor if their childrenRepeatedly voice concerns about their appearance or weightLose weight or stop gaining weight at an age when growth and weight gain are expectedBegin to gain weight at a faster rate than usualEating disorderssuch asanorexia nervosaandbulimia nervosatypically do not occur until adolescence .See alsoOverview of Behavioral Problems in Children.A decrease in appetite caused by a slowing growth rate is common among children around 1 year of age . However an eating problem may develop if a parent or caregiver tries to coerce the child to eat or shows too much concern about the child s appetite or eating habits . The extra attention children with an eating problem receive when parents coax and threaten may inadvertently reward and thus reinforce the child s tendency to refuse eating . Some children may even respond to parental attempts at force feeding by vomiting .Decreasing the tension and negative emotions surrounding mealtimes may be helpful . Emotional scenes can be avoided by putting food in front of the child and removing it 20 to 30 minutes later without comment . The child should be allowed to choose from whatever food is offered at mealtimes and scheduled snacks in the morning and afternoon . Food and fluids other than water should be restricted at all other times . Young children should be offered 3 meals and 2 to 3 snacks each day . Mealtimes should be scheduled at a time when other family members are eating . Distractions such as television or pets should be avoided . Sitting at a table is encouraged . Children should participate in cleaning up any food that is thrown or intentionally dropped on the floor . Using these techniques balances the child s appetite amount of food eaten and nutritional needs .Did You Know . . .Excessive concern by parents about their child s eating habits may contribute to the development of an eating problem .Overeating is another problem caused by many factors .Overeating can lead tochildhood obesity. Once fat cells form they do not go away . Thus children with obesity are more likely than children of normal weight to be obese as adults . Because childhood obesity can lead toadult obesityit should be prevented or treated .