Because the digestive system has a lot of reserve built into it aging has less effect on its function than it does on the function of other organ systems . Nonetheless aging is a factor in several digestive system disorders . In particular older adults are more likely to developdiverticulosisand to have digestive tract disorders for exampleconstipationseeLarge intestine and rectumas a side effect of taking certain drugs .A View of the Digestive SystemSee alsoOverview of the Digestive System.With age the strength ofesophageal contractionsand the tension in the upper esophageal sphincter decrease called presbyesophagus but the movement of food is not impaired by these changes . However some older adults can be affected by diseases that interfere with esophageal contractions .With age the stomach lining s capacity to resist damage decreases which in turn may increase the risk ofpeptic ulcer diseaseespecially in people who useaspirinand other nonsteroidal anti inflammatory drugs NSAIDs . Also with age thestomachcannot accommodate as much food because of decreased elasticity and the rate at which the stomach empties food into the small intestine decreases . However these changes typically do not cause any noticeable symptoms . Aging has little effect on the secretion of stomach juices such as acid and pepsin but conditions that decrease acid secretion such asatrophic gastritisbecome more common . These conditions can result in subsequent problems such asvitamin B12 deficiencyorsmall intestinal bacterial overgrowth.Aging has only minor effects on the structure of thesmall intestinelactose intolerance. Excessive growth of certain bacteriasmall intestinal bacterial overgrowthbecomes more common with age and can lead to pain bloating and weight loss . Bacterial overgrowth may also lead to decreased absorption of certain nutrients such as vitamin B12 iron and calcium .With age thepancreasliverandgallbladderage a number of structural and microscopic changes occur see alsoEffects of Aging on the Liver.Thelarge intestinedoes not undergo much change with age . Therectumdoes enlarge somewhat . Constipation becomes more common see alsoConstipation Essentials for Older Peoplewhich is caused by many factorsA slight slowing in the movement of contents through the large intestineA modest decrease in the contractions of the rectum when filled with stoolMore frequent use of medications that can cause constipationOften less exercise or physical activityPelvic floor weakness in older womenPelvic floor weakness in older women can also contribute tofecal incontinence.