Theimmune systemis the body s defense against foreign or dangerous invaders . Such invaders includeMicroorganisms commonly called germs such as bacteria viruses and fungiParasites such as wormsCancer cellsTransplanted organs and tissuesThe immune system changes throughout life . See alsoOverview of the Immune System.At birthacquired specific immunityis not fully developed . However newborns have some antibodies which crossed the placenta from the mother during pregnancy . These antibodies protect newborns against infections until their own immune system fully develops . Breastfed newborns also receive antibodies from the mother in breast milk .As people age the immune system becomes less effective in the following waysThe immune system becomes less able to distinguish self from nonself that is to identify foreign antigens . As a resultautoimmune disordersbecome more common .Macrophageswhich ingest bacteria and other foreign cells destroy bacteria cancer cells and other antigens more slowly . This slowdown may be one reason that cancer is more common among older people .T cellswhich remember antigens they have previously encountered respond less quickly to the antigens .There are fewerwhite blood cellscapable of responding to new antigens . Thus when older adults encounter a new antigen the body is less able to remember and defend against it .Older adults have smaller amounts ofcomplement proteinsand do not produce as many of these proteins as younger people do in response to bacterial infections .Although the amount of antibody produced in response to an antigen remains about the same overall the antibodies become less able to attach to the antigen . This change may partly explain whypneumoniainfluenzainfective endocarditisandtetanusare more common among older adults and result in death more often . These changes may also partly explain why vaccines are less effective in older adults and thus why it is important for older adults to get booster shots which are available for some vaccines .These changes in immune function may contribute to the greater susceptibility of older adults to some infections and cancers .