In middle age the lens of the eye becomes less flexible and less able to thicken and thus less able to focus on nearby objects a condition calledpresbyopia. Reading glasses or bifocal lenses can help compensate for this problem . For more information on the effects of age on the eye seeChanges in the Body With Aging Eyes.In old age changes to the eye may include the followingYellowing or browning of the lens caused by many years of exposure to ultraviolet light wind and dustThinning of the conjunctivaA bluish hue caused by increased transparency of the scleraThe number of mucous cells in the conjunctiva may decrease with age . Tear production may also decrease with age so that fewer tears are available to keep the surface of the eye moist . Both of these changes explain why older people are more likely to havedry eyes. However even though the eyes tend to be dry normally tearing can be significant when the eyes are irritated such as when an onion is cut or an object contacts the eye .Arcus senilis a deposit of calcium and cholesterol salts appears as a gray white ring at the edge of the cornea . It is common among people older than 60 . Arcus senilis does not affect vision .Some diseases of the retina are more likely to occur in old age includingmacular degenerationdiabetic retinopathyif people have diabetes anddetachment of the retina. Other eye diseases such ascataractsalso become common .The muscles that squeeze the eyelids shut decrease in strength with age . This decrease in strength combined with gravity and age related looseness of the eyelids sometimes causes the lower eyelid to turn outward from the eyeball . This condition is calledectropion. Sometimes because of age related looseness affecting a different part of the eyelid the lower eyelid turns inward causing the eyelashes to rub against the eyeball . This condition is calledentropion. When the upper eyelid is affected the lid can droop a condition called ptosis .In some older people the fat around the orbit shrinks causing the eyeball to sink backward into the orbit . This condition is called enophthalmos . Because of lax tissues in the eyelids the orbital fat can also bulge forward into the eyelids making them appear constantly puffy .The muscles that work to regulate the size of the pupils weaken with age . The pupils become smaller react more sluggishly to light and dilate more slowly in the dark . Therefore people older than 60 may find that objects appear dimmer that they are dazzled initially when going outdoors or when facing oncoming cars during night driving and that they have difficulty going from a brightly lit environment to a darker one . These changes may be particularly bothersome when combined with the effects of a cataract .Other changes in eye function also occur as people age . The sharpness of vision acuity is reduced despite use of the best glasses especially in people who have acataractmacular degenerationoradvanced glaucomasee tableSome Disorders That Affect Mainly Older People. The amount of light that reaches the back of the retina is reduced increasing the need for brighter illumination and for greater contrast between objects and the background . Older people may also see increased numbers of floating black spotsfloaters. Floaters usually do not significantly interfere with vision .