It is not clear whether aging itself or the disorders associated with aging cause the gradual changes that occur in men s sexual functioning . The frequency duration and rigidity of erections gradually decline as men age seeErectile Dysfunction. Levels of the male sex hormonetestosteronetend to decreasereducing sex drivelibido . Blood flow to the penis decreases . Other changes includeDecrease in sensitivity of the penisDecrease in volume of fluid released during ejaculationReduced forewarning of ejaculationOrgasm without ejaculationAfter orgasm penis becomes limp detumescent more quicklyAfter orgasm longer period before an erection can occur refractory periodBeginning at about age 20 the production oftestosteronethe main male sex hormone in men usually begins to decrease an average of 1 to 2 per year . The period later in life whentestosteroneproduction has decreased enough to cause significant symptoms is sometimes described as male menopause or andropause . However the gradual hormone decline in men differs greatly from what women experience inmenopauseduring which female hormones almost always decline rapidly over just a few years . The rate oftestosteronedecline varies greatly among men . Some men in their 70s havetestosteronelevels that match those of the average man in his 30s .Whether young or old men with lowtestosteronelevels may develop certain characteristics associated with aging includingdecreased libidodecreased muscle mass increased abdominal fat thin bones that easily fractureosteoporosisdecreased energy level slowed thinking and a low blood countanemia. Lowtestosteronelevels also increase the risk ofcoronary artery disease.Replacement TherapyMany men with normaltestosteronelevels are interested in takingtestosteroneto slow or reverse development of characteristics of lowtestosterone. However currentlytestosteronereplacement therapy TRT is recommended only for men with both symptoms of lowtestosteroneand abnormally low blood levels oftestosteronea condition calledhypogonadism. Recent studies have found conflicting evidence suggesting a possible increased risk of heart attack and stroke in men who take TRT .Testosteronetreatment may rarely have certain side effects such as snoring increase in symptoms of urinary tract blockage usually caused bybenign prostatic hyperplasiamood changes acne blood clots andbreast enlargement.Testosteronesometimes causes the body to make too many red blood cells possibly increasing the risk for various disorders such as blood clots and strokes .Currentlytestosteronetreatment is thought to have no effect on the development or progression ofprostate cancer. However this subject is not entirely understood and men should talk with their doctors about their risk of developing prostate cancer .Men takingtestosteroneneed to be checked every few months for changes in their blood count and for prostate cancer . Such testing may detect cancers early when they are more likely to be curable . Some men with prostate cancer may taketestosteronetreatment but they should be checked even more frequently by their doctor .