Exercising without proper safety precautions often leads to injury . Muscle overuse and repetitive strain injuries may be prevented byScheduling strength training workouts 48 hours apart to allow muscles to recoverStrength training different muscle groups on different daysKeeping workouts varied in regard to exercise method and equipment choicesPeople should stop exercising immediately if they feel pain other than the usual mild burning sensation in muscles caused by lactic acid buildup .Two types of muscle discomfort may be felt after exercise . The desirable or expected type delayed onset muscle soreness does not start until several hours after exercising intensely . Usually it peaks within 48 hours goes away within 72 hours and feels better after the warm up for the next workout . The undesirable type in which pain indicates injury is usually felt soon after injury occurs may not disappear within 72 hours and may become much more severe over time and if a person continues to exercise .The goal of warming up is to prepare the mind and body for more vigorous activity without compromising performance of the more vigorous activity . Also warming up is meant literally . Warm muscles are more pliable and less likely to tear than cold muscles which contract sluggishly . Starting exercise at lower intensity for example walking rather than running or using lighter weights raises the temperature of muscles by increasing blood flow . Therefore warming up helps prevent injuries . Activities that do not raise muscle temperature do not provide such benefit . Warm up activities also help prepare the mind for more intense activity thus increasing confidence and motivation and improving the mind muscle link for higher quality activity .Did You Know . . .Warming up before exercise is meant literally . The temperature of muscles must actually increase in order for them to be more pliable and to generate maximum contraction .Slowing down gradually cooling down at the end of exercise helps prevent light headedness . When the leg muscles relax blood collects pools in the veins near them . To return the blood toward the heart the leg muscles must contract . When exercise is suddenly stopped blood pools in the legs and not enough blood goes to the brain causing light headedness . By preventing blood from pooling cooling down also helps the bloodstream speed up its removal of lactic acid a natural chemical product that builds up in the muscles during exercise and that can unduly strain the body if it accumulates . Some ways to cool down include walking for a few minutes after a run doing 1 to 2 light weight training sets after more intense sets and stretching .Proper hydration is important particularly when exertion is prolonged or occurs in a hot environment . People should be well hydrated before activity drink fluids regularly during extended exertion and continue to drink fluids after activity . During exercise people should typically drink about 1 2 to 1 cup 120 to 240 milliliters every 15 to 20 minutes depending on heat and exertion level . People can be distracted by their activity and thus not realize that they are thirsty . Another way to estimate the amount of fluids needed is to subtract body weight after exercise from body weight before exercise . Then about 2 cups of fluid is consumed per pound lost about 1 liter for each kilogram lost . People withheart failurewho are ondialysisor who have other conditions for which fluid is restricted as directed by a doctor should discuss fluid intake targets or limits with their doctor .Did You Know . . .During exercise people should drink about 1 2 to 1 cup 120 to 240 milliliters every 15 to 20 minutes even if they are not thirsty .However people should avoid drinking too much water because in extreme casesoverhydrationcan cause the level of salt in the blood to fall too low a condition calledhyponatremiawhich can lead to nausea or even seizures . Overhydration and hyponatremia are usually only a problem for people who engage in prolonged outdoor exertion for example long distance runners or sport teams playing long games .To replace lost fluids plain water is usually fine unless very large amounts are necessary several quarts for example . Such a large fluid requirement is unusual unless a person exercises outdoors in high heat and humidity . In this case electrolyte containing sports drinks may be preferred . However if the sports drink has a lot of sugar more than 8 glucose it should be mixed with plain water at a 50 50 ratio so that the fluids are not absorbed too slowly .