Feverfew is a bushy perennial herb . The dried leaves are used in capsules tablets and liquid extracts . Parthenolides and glycosides are thought to be its active components .See alsoOverview of Dietary Supplements.Claims for FeverfewPeople take feverfew mostly to preventmigraine headachesand to treat inflammation . It has also been used to improve mood and treat asthma menstrual painrosaceaand arthritis and is said to have anticancer properties .Evidence for FeverfewEvidence from 6 different studies shows varying results for feverfew s effectiveness in preventing migraines but a recent study was larger and did show a small decrease in the number of monthly migraines . Differences in study findings may reflect the different formulations and doses of feverfew used .In studies of people with arthritis feverfew did not relieve symptoms . No rigorous scientific studies support other health benefit claims .Side Effects of FeverfewMouth ulcers skin inflammation dermatitis and mild digestive upset may occur in people taking feverfew . Feverfew may cause taste to be altered and an increased heart rate . Feverfew is not recommended for children or for women who are pregnant or breastfeeding . In pregnant women feverfew may cause the uterus to contract and result in miscarriage . In addition feverfew may cause allergic rashes .Suddenly stopping feverfew supplementation may worsen migraines and cause nervousness and insomnia .People with allergies to ragweed hay fever or other related plants such as daisies marigolds and chrysanthemums may also have allergic reactions to feverfew .Due to potential bleeding feverfew should be discontinued 2 weeks prior to surgery .Drug Interactions with FeverfewFeverfew may interact with medications that prevent blood clots anticoagulants medications used to manage migraine headaches and nonsteroidal anti inflammatory drugs NSAIDs . It may reduce the normal clotting tendency of platelets particles in the blood that help stop bleeding .Recommendations for FeverfewFeverfew may possibly decrease monthly migraine frequency but any effect is probably small .People with hay fever or certain plant allergies or who take anticoagulants other medications used to treat migraines or nonsteroidal anti inflammatory drugs NSAIDs should talk to their doctor before taking feverfew . Pregnant women should not take feverfew .More InformationThe following English language resource may be useful . Please note that THE MANUAL is not responsible for the content of this resource .National Institutes of Health s National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health