Fish oilis derived from the tissues of oily fish such as mackerel herring tuna and salmon .Fish oilsupplements contain oil that is extracted directly or concentrated and put in capsule form .The active ingredients infish oilare omega 3 fatty acids eicosapentaenoic acid EPA and docosahexaenoic acid DHA . Some plant based foods such as flaxseeds chia seeds walnuts and canola oil contain alpha linolenic acid which the body can convert to DHA and EPA . Also yeast strains that can naturally produce substantial amounts of these oils have been genetically engineered .Western diets typically are low in omega 3 fatty acids .See alsoOverview of Dietary Supplements.Claims forLow dietary intake of omega 3 fatty acids has been linked to a variety of health problems .Fish oilsupplements have been promoted to protect the heart ease inflammation and improve mental health . Specificallyfish oilis claimed toPrevent and treatcoronary artery diseaseHelp treatrheumatoid arthritisSlow the progression ofage related macular degenerationSlow the progression of cancerHelp relieve dry eyesHelp relieve depressionEvidence forPrevious evidence showed thatfish oilprobably decreases heart attacks and death due to abnormal heart rhythms in people with coronary artery disease .Fish oilalso appeared to decrease blood levels of triglycerides a risk factor for coronary artery disease . Higher doses offish oilmay also decrease risk of coronary artery disease andheart failurewithout decreasing blood pressure . Recent studies showed that takingfish oilfor 1 to 7 years decreased levels of triglycerides but probably did not have much of an effect on heart attacks and death due to abnormal heart rhythms or in strokes in people with coronary artery disease . Thedescribed limitations of using nonprescription over the counterfish oilsupplements and advised that only prescription products approved by the U . S . Food and Drug Administration be used for people with high triglyceride levels .Scientific evidence supporting any benefit for people with rheumatoid arthritis is inconclusive .Controlling risk factors foratherosclerosissuch as high blood pressure and regularly eating more foods that have omega 3 fatty acids and more dark green leafy vegetables may help slow the progression of age related macular degeneration . However taking supplements of omega 3 fatty acids does not slow the progression of the disorder .Some recent studies in animals suggest that omega 3 fatty acids may stop cancers from growing or slow their growth . However these findings have not been replicated in humans .Some evidence suggests thatfish oilas supplements or in food helps relieve symptoms of dry eyes but the evidence is inconsistent .Observational evidence shows that individuals who takefish oilsupplements may have less depression . However any such effects have not been proven conclusively and are likely to be small .Side Effects ofFishy tasting belching acne exacerbation nausea and diarrhea may occur . A few studies suggest that too muchfish oilcan cause bleeding but others do not show a relationship . Taking very high doses offish oilmay increase the risk of developingatrial fibrillationan abnormal heart rhythm .Although some fish contain excess amounts of mercury laboratory testing does not consistently show excess mercury infish oilsupplements . Even so based on documented side effects pregnant or breastfeeding women should not take omega 3 fatty acid supplements extracted from fish and should limit eating certain types and amounts of fish because of the potential risk of mercury contamination .Drug Interactions withFish oilshould be taken cautiously by people on antihypertensive blood pressure lowering medications because it may lower blood pressure more than desired .Fish oilfish oil.Recommendations forFish oilmay decrease rates of heart attack and deaths caused by abnormal heart rhythms and decrease blood levels of triglycerides a risk factor for coronary artery disease . To maximize the chance of these benefits prescription formulations should be used .Fish oilmay help relieve dry eye symptoms but evidence for this is inconsistent .Fish oilfish oilsupplements .More InformationThe following English language resource may be useful . Please note that THE MANUAL is not responsible for the content of this resource .National Institutes of Health s National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health