Additives and contaminants are often components of commercially grown prepared or packaged foods . Noncommercially grown food can also become contaminated due to pollution or pesticides .Substances such as preservatives emulsifiers antioxidants and stabilizers are often added to a food to do the followingEnable it to be processed more easilyPreserve it longer and reduce spoilagePrevent contamination by microorganisms and thus prevent food borne disordersImprove taste add color or enhance its aroma making it more appealingIn commercially prepared foods the amount of additives that can be included is limited to that shown to be safe by laboratory tests . However weighing the benefits of additives against the risks is often complex . For example nitrite which is used in cured meats not only improves flavor but also inhibits the growth of bacteria that cause botulism . However nitrite converts to nitrosamines which can cause cancer in animals . On the other hand the amount of nitrite added to cured meat is small compared with the amount of nitrates that occurs naturally in food and that is converted to nitrite by the salivary glands .Rarely some additives such as sulfites may cause allergic reactions . Sulfites which occur naturally in wines are added to such foods as dried fruit and dried potatoes as a preservative .Foods may be contaminated because the air water and soil are polluted for example by heavy metals such as lead cadmium and mercury or PCBs polychlorinated biphenyls . PCBs used to be used as coolants and in many other products and are now present in the air soil and water in many places .Foods may be contaminated by pesticides or packaging materials or during cooking or processing . In addition so called endocrine disrupting chemicals in the environment such as some insecticides petrochemicals and industrial solvents can affect the body s endocrine system and alter hormone levels causing alterations in sex organs immune function nervous system function growth and development and certain cancers they may also promote obesity .Foods may also be contaminated by drugs such as antibiotics and growth hormone that are given to animals .Sometimes limited amounts of contaminants are allowed in foods because the contaminants cannot be completely eliminated without damaging the foods . Common contaminants includePesticidesHeavy metalsNitrates in green leafy vegetablesAflatoxins produced by molds in nuts and milkGrowth promoting hormones in dairy products and meatLevels that have not caused illness or other problems in people are considered safe . However determining whether a small amount of a contaminant has caused a problem is very difficult . Thus safe levels are often determined by general agreement rather than by hard evidence . Whether problems can result from consuming a small amount of some contaminants over a long time is unclear although with very tiny amounts such problems are unlikely .Foods may contain animal hairs animal feces and insect parts in such tiny amounts that removal is impossible .