ginsengand Asianginseng. Americanginsengis milder than Asianginseng.Ginsengis available in many forms such as fresh and dried roots extracts solutions capsules tablets cosmetics sodas and teas .Siberianginsengis not reallyginsengand contains different active components .Ginsengproducts vary considerably in quality because many contain little or no detectable active ingredient . In very few cases someginsengproducts from Asia have been purposefully mixed with mandrake root or with phenylbutazone or aminopyrine medications that have been removed from the market in the United States because of unacceptable side effects .See alsoOverview of Dietary Supplements.Claims forPeople takeginsengmostly to enhance physical and mental performance and to increase energy and resistance to the harmful effects of stress and aging . Many take it to enhance sexual performance including treatingerectile dysfunction.Ginsengmay reduce blood sugar levels and increase levels of high density lipoprotein HDL the good cholesterol .Ginsengmay also improve immune function .Evidence forThere is no convincing evidence thatginsengenhances mental performance in either healthy people or those diagnosed with dementia .One study found thatginsengIn one large but short studyginsengimproved quality of life according to a subjective report . However evaluating quality of life and some other possible effects ofginsengsuch as energy is difficult because it is so subjective . In one study of people with diabetesginsengreduced blood sugar levels and improved mood and energy . Some preliminary evidence suggests that Americanginsengmay help relieve respiratory tract infections .Side Effects ofGinsenghas a reasonably good safety record . However some authorities recommend limiting the use ofginsengto 3 months because of the possible development of side effects . The most common side effects are nervousness and excitability which usually decrease after the first few days . The ability to concentrate may decrease and blood sugar may decrease to abnormally low levels hypoglycemia . Other side effects may include headaches allergic reactions and sleep and digestive problems breast tenderness and menstrual irregularities . Becauseginsenghas anestrogenlike effect women who are pregnant or breastfeeding should not take it nor should children .Occasionally there have been reports of more serious side effects such as asthma attacks increased blood pressure palpitations or risk of abnormal heart rhythms and in postmenopausal women uterine bleeding . To many peopleginsengtastes unpleasant .Drug Interactions withGinsengestrogentherapy monoamine oxidase inhibitors MAOIs used to treat depression and medications that decrease blood sugar levels antihyperglycemic medications used to treat diabetes .Ginsengmay also increase the blood levels of certain medications . For instanceginsengIfginsengRecommendations forGinsengis not recommended because it does not provide any proven health benefit and has some risk of significant side effects and drug interactions . Pregnant or breastfeeding women should not takeginseng.More InformationThe following English language resource may be useful . Please note that THE MANUAL is not responsible for the content of this resource .National Institutes of Health s National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health