Glucosaminecan be applied topically in a cream or salve or taken in tablet or capsule form usually asglucosaminesulfate but sometimes asglucosaminehydrochloride .Glucosamineoften is taken withchondroitin sulfate.See alsoOverview of Dietary Supplements.Claims forPeople takeglucosaminemostly to treatosteoarthritisof the knee . Its role in treating osteoarthritis in other locations is less well defined .Evidence forEvidence is conflicting . Some evidence suggests it has both pain relieving and disease modifying effects whereas other large and well designed studies show it to be of no benefit . One large study has shown thatglucosaminehydrochloride is beneficial when combined with chondroitin sulfate . Evidence supports use ofglucosaminesulfate from a specific manufacturer Rotta Research Laboratorium for mild to moderate osteoarthritis in the knee when taken for at least 6 months . The benefit ofglucosaminefor severe osteoarthritis in the knee or osteoarthritis in other locations is less clear .Side Effects ofGlucosamineis safe for most people . Common side effects are itching and mild digestive problems such as heartburn diarrhea vomiting and nausea . Other side effects include fatigue headache difficulty sleeping sun sensitivity and nail changes . People with liver disease should avoidglucosamineif possible . People who have a shellfish allergy and takeglucosamineextracted from shellfish may have an allergic reaction . Some people with asthma have had flares .Drug Interactions withHigh doseglucosamineRecommendations forGlucosamineis generally considered safe but evidence of its benefits is limited . People withosteoarthritisof the knee may consider talking to their doctor about addingglucosamineusually combined with chondroitin sulfate to their treatment plan . However its use is not endorsed by organizations of specialists that treat osteoarthritis .More InformationThe following English language resource may be useful . Please note that THE MANUAL is not responsible for the content of this resource .National Institutes of Health s National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health