Intrauterine devices IUDs are small flexible T shaped plastic devices that are inserted into the uterus . In the United States 12 of women who use contraception use IUDs . IUDs are popular because of their advantages as a contraceptive method including being highly effective and having minimal side effects . Also IUDs need to be changed only every 3 5 8 or 10 years avoiding the need to use a daily weekly or monthly contraceptive method .IUDs must be inserted and removed by a doctor or other health care professional . Insertion takes only a few minutes . Insertion may be painful so an anesthetic may be injected into the cervix before the IUD is inserted . Removal usually causes minimal discomfort .IUDs prevent pregnancy byKilling or immobilizing spermPreventing sperm from fertilizing the eggCreating an inflammatory reaction inside the uterus that is toxic to spermUnderstanding Intrauterine Devicescopperwire wrapped around the base and on the arms of the T . A plastic string is attached to the IUD . The string enables a woman to make sure the device is still in place and a doctor to easily remove it .copperIUD .ThecopperIUD is effective for at least 10 years . When it is left in place for 12 years fewer than 2 of women become pregnant .One year after removal of an IUD 80 to 90 of women who try to conceive do so .Most women including those who have not had children and adolescent girls can use IUDs . However IUDs should not be used when the following conditions are presentA pelvic infection such as asexually transmitted infectionorpelvic inflammatory diseaseA structural abnormality that distorts the uterusUnexplainedbleeding from the vaginaGestational trophoblastic diseaseCancer of the cervixorcancer of the lining of the uterusendometriumPregnancybreast cancerForcopperIUDsWilson diseaseor an allergy tocopperHaving had a sexually transmitted infection pelvic inflammatory disease or amislocated ectopic pregnancyin the past does not prevent women from using an IUD .Personal beliefs that prohibit abortion do not prohibit the use of IUDs because IUDs do not prevent conception by causing a fertilized egg to be aborted . However when used foremergency contraceptionafter unprotected sex acopperAn IUD may be inserted at any time during the menstrual cycle if women have not had unprotected sex since their last period . If they have had unprotected sex a pregnancy test must be done before an IUD is inserted and women are advised to use another method of contraception until the test is done . Pregnancy must be ruled out before the IUD is inserted unless women wish to use an IUD as emergency contraception after unprotected sex . In such cases acopperIUD may be inserted to prevent unwanted pregnancy . If inserted within 5 days of one episode of unprotected sex acopperBefore the IUD is inserted doctors may recommend testing for sexually transmitted infections STIs based on a woman s risk factors . However doctors do not need to wait for STI test results before inserting the IUD . If results are positive the STI is treated and the IUD is left in place . If doctors observe a discharge that contains pus just before the IUD is to be inserted an IUD is not inserted . In such cases STI testing is done and antibiotics are started immediately without waiting for test results . The IUD is then inserted after treatment of the infection is complete .Before insertion an anesthetic may be injected into the cervix to decrease pain during insertion .An IUD may be inserted immediately after a miscarriage or an abortion that occurs during the 1st or 2nd trimester and immediately after the placenta is delivered after a cesarean delivery .The uterus is briefly contaminated with bacteria at the time of insertion but an infection rarely results . IUD strings do not provide access for bacteria . An IUD increases the risk of a pelvic infection only during the first month of use . If an infection develops it is treated with antibiotics . The IUD can be left in place unless the infection persists after treatment .A routine follow up visit after IUD insertion is not necessary . However women should see their doctor if they have problems such as pain heavy bleeding abnormal vaginal discharge or fever if the IUD is expelled or if they are dissatisfied with the IUD .Bleeding and pain are the main reasons that women have an IUD removed accounting for more than half of all removals before the usual replacement time . ThecopperTypically IUDs are expelled in fewer than 5 of women during the first year after insertion often during the first few weeks . Sometimes a woman does not notice the expulsion . Plastic strings are attached to the IUD so that if she wishes a woman can check every so often to make sure that the IUD is still in place . However a woman typically has bleeding or pain if an IUD is expelled or is in the wrong position . If another IUD is inserted after one has been expelled it usually stays in place . If doctors suspect that the IUD has been expelled women must use another form of birth control until the problem is resolved .Rarely the uterus is torn perforated during insertion . Usually perforation does not cause symptoms . It is discovered when a woman cannot find the plastic strings and ultrasonography or an x ray shows the IUD located outside the uterus . An IUD that perforates the uterus and passes into the abdominal cavity must be surgically removed usually usinglaparoscopyto prevent it from injuring and scarring the intestine .If women conceive with an IUD in place they are more likely to have a mislocated ectopic pregnancy . Nonetheless the overall risk of an ectopic pregnancy is much lower for women using IUDs than for those not using a contraceptive method because IUDs prevent pregnancy effectively .In addition to providing effective birth control all types of IUDs may reduce the risk ofuterine endometrial cancerandcancer of the ovaries.ThecopperIUD can provide effective contraception for women who cannot use hormonal methods .