sleep wake cycle.Melatoninused in supplements can be derived from animals but most is produced artificially . In some countriesmelatoninis considered a medication and is regulated as such .See alsoOverview of Dietary Supplements.Claims forPeople usemelatoninmostly to treatinsomniaand to help minimize the effects ofjet lagor of shift work . People who are traveling across time zones may takemelatoninon the day or night of departure and for 2 to 4 nights after arrival . People who rotate work shifts may takemelatoninbefore going to bed . Research is being conducted in usingmelatoninto resynchronize the sleep wake cycle for people in the early phases of Alzheimer disease as well as for seasonal affective disorder feeling depressed during winter months .Evidence forEvidence suggests thatmelatoninsupplements can affect the sleep wake cycle . Thusmelatoninsupplements may help certain people with symptoms of jet lag or temporary insomnia and has been used for as long as 6 months . However there is little evidence thatmelatonineffectively treats chronic insomnia .Side Effects ofHeadache dizziness nausea sleepiness and transient depression may occur .Melatoninmay increase existing depression . Whethermelatoninis safe when used long term is unknown .Melatoninis best taken under medical supervision particularly when given to children . In people withepilepsymelatoninmay increase seizures .Melatoninmay exacerbateautoimmune diseases. Alsomelatoninmay decrease fertility and whethermelatoninis safe in pregnancy or while breastfeeding is unknown .Drug Interactions withMelatoninMelatoninmay enhance the sedative effects of certain medications such as benzodiazepines ..Some medications may affectmelatoninmelatoninmelatoninlevels .Recommendations forPeople with problems sleeping or who want to treat or prevent jet lag can trymelatoninbut most particularly those considering takingmelatoninrepeatedly should consult with their doctor first .MelatoninMore InformationThe following English language resource may be useful . Please note that THE MANUAL is not responsible for the content of this resource .National Institutes of Health s National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health