Menopause is the permanent end of menstrual periods ovulation and fertility .For up to several years before and just after menopauseestrogenlevels fluctuate widely periods become irregular and symptoms such as hot flashes may occur .Menopause is diagnosed when a woman has not had a period for 1 year blood tests are usually not necessary to confirm it .Certain measures including hormone therapy or other medications can lessen symptoms .After menopause bone density decreases .During the reproductive yearsmenstrual periodsusually occur in approximately monthly cycles with an egg released from the ovary ovulation in the middle of the cycle about 2 weeks after the first day of the previous period . For this cycle to occur regularly the ovaries must produce enough of the hormonesestrogenandprogesterone.Menopause occurs because as women age the ovaries stop producingestrogenandprogesterone. During the years before menopause production ofestrogenandprogesteronebegins to fluctuate and menstrual periods and ovulation occur less often . Eventually menstrual periods and ovulation end permanently and pregnancy can no longer occur naturally . A woman s final period can be identified only later after she has had no periods for at least 1 year . Women who do not wish to become pregnant should use birth control until 1 year has passed since their last menstrual period .The aging of the female reproductive system before and after menopause is described in stagesReproductive stageincludes the time from a woman s first menstrual period through the menopausal transition .Menopausal transitionis the phase that leads up to the final menstrual period . It is characterized by changes in the pattern of menstrual periods . The menopausal transition lasts from 4 to 8 years . It lasts longer in women who smoke and in women who were younger when it began . Research shows that on average Black women experience more years of menopausal transition than White women .Perimenopauseis part of the menopausal transition and refers to the several years before and the 1 year after the final menstrual period . The number of years a woman is in perimenopause before her final menstrual period varies greatly . During perimenopauseestrogenandprogesteronelevels fluctuate widely and eventually decrease significantly but the changes vary in other hormones such astestosterone. These hormone fluctuations are thought to cause the menopausal symptoms experienced by many women in their 40s .Postmenopauserefers to the time after the final menstrual period .In the United States the average age for menopause is about 51 . However menopause may occur normally in women aged 45 or even 40 to age 55 or older . Menopause may start at a younger age in women whoSmokeLive at a high altitudeAre malnourishedHave an autoimmune diseaseMenopause is considered premature when it occurs before age 40 .Premature menopauseis also called premature ovarian failure or primary ovarian insufficiency .Did You Know . . .Symptoms of menopause can start years before menstrual periods end .The average age for menopause is about 51 but anywhere between age 40 and 55 or older is considered normal .Symptoms of MenopauseDuring perimenopause symptoms may be mild moderate or severe or there may be no symptoms . Symptoms may last from 6 months to about 10 years sometimes longer .Sometimes symptoms that are thought to be due to menopause can be caused by other medical issues . If symptoms occur and the timing does not line up with menopause or if the symptoms do not improve with measures used for menopausal symptoms a woman should discuss other possible causes with a health care professional .Irregular menstrual periodsmay be the first symptom of perimenopause . Typically periods occur more often then less often but any pattern is possible . Periods may be shorter or longer lighter or heavier . They may not occur for months then become regular again . In some women periods are regular until menopause .Hot flashesaffect 75 to 85 of women . Hot flashes usually begin before periods stop . They last for an average of almost 7 1 2 years but can last more than 10 years . Research shows that on average Black women experience hot flashes more frequently and over a longer period of time than Asian Hispanic or White women . Usually hot flashes become milder and occur less frequently as time passes .What causes hot flashes is unknown . But it may involve a resetting of the brain s thermostat the hypothalamus which controls body temperature . As a result very small increases in temperature can make women feel hot . Hot flashes may be related to fluctuations in hormone levels .During a hot flash blood vessels near the skin surface widen dilate . As a result blood flow increases causing the skin especially on the head and neck to become red and warm flushed . Women feel warm or hot and perspiration may be profuse . Hot flashes are sometimes called hot flushes because the face can become red .A hot flash lasts from 30 seconds to 5 minutes and may be followed by chills . Night sweats are hot flashes that occur at night .Other symptomsmay occur around the time of perimenopause or menopause . The changes in hormone levels that occur at this time may contribute to the followingBreast tendernessMoodinessWorsening of migraines that occur just before during or just after menstrual periods menstrual migrainesDepression irritability anxiety nervousness sleep disturbances including insomnia loss of concentration headache and fatigue may also occur . Many women experience these symptoms during perimenopause . Although these symptoms may be related to other factors such as aging itself or a disorder they are often worsened by the hormonal fluctuations and decreases in estrogen during perimenopause .Night sweats may disturb sleep contributing to fatigue irritability loss of concentration and mood changes . In such cases these symptoms may be indirectly through night sweats related to menopause . However during menopause sleep disturbances are common even among women who do not have hot flashes . Midlife stresses such as struggles with adolescents concerns about aging caring for aging parents and changes in marital relationship may contribute to sleep disturbances . Thus the relationship of fatigue irritability loss of concentration and mood changes to menopause seems less clear .Many of the symptoms that occur during perimenopause although disturbing become less frequent and less intense after menopause . However the decrease inestrogenlevels causes changes that can continue to negatively affect health for example increasing the risk of osteoporosis . These changes may worsen unless measures to prevent them are taken . The following may be affectedReproductive tractThe lining of the vagina becomes thinner drier and less elastic a condition called vaginal atrophy . These changes may make sexual intercourse painful . Otherparts of the female anatomythe labia minora clitoris uterus and ovaries decrease in size . Sex drive libido commonly decreases with age . Most women can still have an orgasm but some require more time to reach orgasm or feel that their orgasm is less intense .Urinary tractThe lining of the urethra becomes thinner and the urethra becomes shorter . Because of these changes microorganisms can enter the body more easily and some women developurinary tract infectionsmore frequently . A woman with a urinary tract infection may feel a burning sensation when she urinates . After menopause women may sometimes experience episodes in which they have a sudden need to urinate calledurinary urgencysometimes resulting inurge urinary incontinenceleaking small or large amounts of urine . Urinary incontinence becomes more common and severe with age . However it is unclear how much menopause contributes to incontinence . Many other factors such as the effects of childbirth obesity and the use of hormone therapy may contribute to incontinence .SkinThe decrease inestrogenas well as aging itself causes a decrease in the amount of collagen a protein that makes skin strong and elastin a protein that makes skin elastic . Thus the skin may become thinner drier less elastic and more vulnerable to injury .BoneThe decrease inestrogenoften leads to a decrease in bone density and sometimes toosteoporosisbecauseestrogenhelps maintain bone . Bone becomes less dense and weaker making fractures more likely . During the first 5 years after menopause bone density decreases rapidly . After that it decreases at about the same rate as it does in men by about 1 to 3 each year .Cholesterol lipid levelsAfter menopause levels oflow density lipoproteinLDL the unhealthy cholesterol increase in women . Levels ofhigh density lipoproteinHDL the good cholesterol remain about the same as before menopause . The change in LDL levels may partly explain whyatherosclerosisand thuscoronary artery diseasebecome more common among women after menopause . However whether these changes result from aging or from the decrease inestrogenlevels after menopause is unclear . Until menopause the highestrogenlevels may protect against coronary artery disease .Some postmenopausal women experienceburning mouth syndrome.Genitourinary syndrome of menopauseis a fairly new more accurate term used to refer to symptoms that affect the vagina and urinary tract and that are caused by menopause . These symptoms include vaginal dryness pain during sexual intercourse urinary urgency and urinary tract infections .Did You Know . . .Genitourinary syndrome of menopause is a fairly new term used to refer to menopausal symptoms that affect the vagina vulva and urinary tract such as vaginal dryness pain during sexual intercourse urinary urgency and urinary tract infections .Diagnosis of MenopauseRecent pattern of menstrual periodsRarely blood tests to measure hormone levelsIn most women menopause can be diagnosed after 1 full year without menstrual periods . Thus laboratory tests are usually not needed .Timing of cessation of menopause is described based on age as followsPremature menopause 39 years old or youngerEarly menopause 40 to 45 years oldMenopause usual age range 46 years old or olderIf menopause occurs before age 45 or if the menstrual pattern is not clear cut for example periods stop for several months but then bleeding occurs tests may be done to check for disorders that can disrupt menstrual periods . If blood tests are needed to confirm menopause the tests measure levels of follicle stimulating hormone FSH which stimulates the ovaries to produceestrogenandprogesterone.Sometimes doctors do a pelvic examination to check for typical changes in the vagina which support the diagnosis of menopause or as part of the evaluation if a woman has uncomfortable symptoms such as vaginal dryness or pain during sexual intercourse .Treatment of MenopauseCognitive behavioral therapyClinical hypnosisNonhormonal medicationsHormone therapyUnderstanding what happens during perimenopause can help women cope with the symptoms . Talking with other women who have gone through menopause or with a doctor may also help .Treatment of menopause focuses on relieving symptoms such as hot flashes sleep issues mood changes and vaginal dryness .Effective measures that do not involve hormones includeHypnosis by a qualified health care professional to help relieve hot flashesCognitive behavioral therapyCognitive behavioral therapy has been adapted to be used during the menopause transition and postmenopause . It can help women manage hot flashes and night sweats .If such measures are not successfulhormone therapynorepinephrineIn addition to treatment of menopausal symptoms postmenopausal women should bescreened for osteoporosisif they meet the following criteriaHigh risk of bone fracture for example women with a family history of osteoporosisHistory ofeating disordersa low body mass index BMI chronic corticosteroid usegastric bypass surgeryCrohn diseaseamalabsorption syndromeor a prior fragility fracture or other risk factorsAge 65 years or olderGeneral measures such as cooling methods for example using fans wearing light clothing avoiding triggers such as alcohol or spicy food and dietary changes may help some women . Mindfulness exercise or yoga may help with sleep or a general sense of well being . However research has had mixed results about all these general measures and they have not been proven to be effective so many menopause experts do not recommend them .To managesleep disturbanceswomen can follow a routine to calm themselves before they go to bed and when night sweats wake them up . Developinggood sleep habitsand exercise can also help improve sleep .Bladder controlmay be improved byKegel exercises. For these exercises a woman tightens the pelvic muscles as if stopping urine flow . Women may be taught how to use biofeedback to help them learn to control their pelvic muscles .Biofeedbackis a method of bringing unconscious biologic processes under conscious control . It involves using electronic devices to measure information about these processes and to report it back to the conscious mind . Other measures that may help includeLimiting fluid intake at certain times for example before going out or 3 to 4 hours before bedtimeAvoiding foods that irritate the bladder such ascaffeinecontaining fluids and spicy or salty foodsIfvaginal drynessis uncomfortable or makes sexual intercourse painful an over the counter vaginal lubricant may help . For some women applying a vaginal moisturizer daily or a few times a week helps . Staying sexually active or masturbating also helps by stimulating blood flow to the vagina and the surrounding tissues and by keeping tissues flexible .Several types of medications can help relieve some of the symptoms associated with menopause .AntidepressantsAsleep aidis sometimes recommended to relieve insomnia .Overview of Dietary Supplements Safety and Effectiveness.Some supplements for example kava can be harmful . Furthermore some supplements can interact with other medications and can worsen some disorders .Concerns about using standard hormone therapy have led to an interest in using hormones derived from plants such as yams and soy . These hormones have nearly the same molecular structure as hormones made by the body and thus are called bioidentical hormones . Many of the hormones used in standard hormone therapy are also so called bioidentical hormones derived from plants . Menopause experts recommend use of the hormones in standard hormone therapy because have been tested and approved and their use is closely monitored .Sometimes a pharmacist custom makes compounds bioidentical hormones for a person according to a health care professional s prescription . These are called compounded bioidentical hormones . Their production is not well regulated . Thus many doses combinations and forms are possible and purity consistency and potency of the products vary . Compounded bioidentical hormones are often marketed as substitutes for standard hormone therapy sometimes along with claims they are a better safer treatment than standard hormone therapy . But there is no evidence that compounded products are safer more effective or even as effective as standard hormone therapy . Sometimes women are not told that compounded bioidentical hormone products have the same risks as standard hormones .Women who are considering taking these compounded hormone therapies are advised to discuss them with a doctor .Hormone Therapy for MenopauseHormone therapy can relieve moderate to severe symptoms of menopause such as hot flashes night sweats and vaginal dryness and for some women to prevent or treatosteoporosis. However hormone therapy may increase the risk of developing certain serious disorders .Hormone therapy for menopause improves quality of life for many women by relieving their symptoms . However if a woman does not have menopausal symptoms hormone therapy is not recommended because it does not improve overall quality of life . Whether to take hormone therapy is a decision that must be made by a woman and her doctor based on the woman s individual situation . Women should ask their doctor about the risks and benefits of hormone therapy before they start taking the medications .For many women risks outweigh potential benefits so this therapy is not recommended . However for some women depending on their medical conditions and risk factors potential benefits may outweigh risks .For healthy women with bothersome menopausal symptoms who are under age 60 or were diagnosed with menopause fewer than 10 years previously potential benefits of hormone therapy are most likely to exceed potential harms .Usually doctors do not recommend that women start taking hormone therapy ifWomen are older than 60 .Menopause was diagnosed more than 10 to 20 years previously .In these women the risk ofcoronary artery diseasestrokeblood clots in the legsblood clots in the lungsanddementiais higher .When hormone therapy is used doctors prescribe the lowest hormone dose that controls symptoms and for the shortest time needed .Hormone therapy can includeEstrogenBothProgestogens resembleprogesteronea female hormone made by the body .For women with general menopausal symptoms such as hot flashes mood changes or sleep issues a full dose of estrogen and progestogen are given which treats the whole body . If symptoms are only affecting the vagina or urinary tract vaginal medications are usually given that treat symptoms just in that area of the body .Most women are given a combination of both estrogen and a progestogen combination hormone therapy .Estrogenalone is given only to women who have had a hysterectomy surgical removal of the uterus because takingestrogenwithout a progestogen increases the risk ofcancer of the uterine liningendometrial cancer . The progestogen helps protect against this cancer . The exception to this is very low dose vaginal estrogen therapy used forgenitourinary syndrome of menopausewhich can be given without a progestogen . Another option for women with a uterus is the.For women at risk of bone loss or fracture hormone therapy may be recommended ifThey are under age 60 .Menopause was diagnosed fewer than 10 years previously .They cannot take other medications such as bisphosphonates to prevent bone loss and fractures .Hormone therapy reduces bone loss and risk of fracture in these women .Estrogen is helpful in relieving several types of symptomsHot flashesEstrogenis the most effective treatment for hot flashes .Drying and thinning of vaginal tissuesEstrogencan prevent or treat vaginal dryness and this can be very helpful if a woman has developed pain with sexual intercourse . When the only problem a woman has is drying and thinning of these tissues doctors may recommend a form ofestrogenthat is inserted into the vagina . These forms include low doseestrogentablets a low doseestrogenring a low doseestrogencream and a DHEA dehydroepiandrosterone suppository . When a low dose ofestrogenis used women who still have a uterus do not have to take a progestogen . With high doses ofestrogenwomen with a uterus need to take a progestogen .Frequent urinary tract infections or an urgent need to urinate Forms ofestrogenthat are inserted into the vagina creams tablets or rings help relieve these problems .OsteoporosisEstrogenwith or without a progestogen helps prevent or slow the progression of osteoporosis . However taking hormone therapy for the sole purpose of preventing osteoporosis is usually not recommended . Most women can take abisphosphonate or another medicationto help prevent osteoporosis instead although these medications have their own risks . Bisphosphonates increase bone mass by reducing the amount of bone the body breaks down as it re forms bones . The body continuously breaks bone down and re forms it to help bones adjust to the changing demands placed on them . As people age more bone is broken down than is re formed .Estrogen is usually taken with a progestogen . Estrogen taken without a progestogen increases the risk of endometrial cancer in women who have a uterus have not had a hysterectomy .The risk increases with higher doses and longer use ofestrogen. Taking a progestogen withestrogenalmost eliminates the risk of endometrial cancer reducing the risk below that for women who do not take hormone therapy . Nonetheless doctors evaluate any vaginal bleeding in women taking any type of hormonal therapy to rule out endometrial cancer .Estrogen increases the risk of the followingBreast cancer The risk of breast cancer begins to increase by a very small amount after takingestrogenplus a progestogen for about 3 to 5 years . But ifestrogenis taken alone at the beginning of menopause risk may not begin to increase until after 10 years or even 15 years .StrokeBlood clots in the legsdeep vein thrombosisand blood clots in the lungspulmonary embolismGallbladder disorderssuch as gallstonesUrinary incontinenceTakingestrogenat full dose increases the risk of developing incontinence and worsens preexisting incontinence . However low dose vaginal estrogen therapy improves urinary incontinence .Although taking hormone therapy increases the risk of the above disorders the risk is still low in healthy women who take hormone therapy for a short time during or shortly after perimenopause . Risk of most of these disorders increases with age particularly 10 years or more past menopause whether hormone therapy is taken or not . In women who start hormone therapy after age 65 takingestrogenplus a progestogen also increases the risk of coronary artery disease .Risks of hormone therapy are thought to be lower when low doses ofestrogenare used . Most forms ofestrogenthat are inserted into the vagina such asestrogencreams or tablets or rings that containestrogenare much lower doses than full body doses in pills or skin patches . One exception is a vaginal ring that has a full body dose and is used to treat general menopausal symptoms .Estrogengiven through a skin patch transdermal form or vaginal ring appears to have a lower risk of blood clots stroke and gallbladder disorders such as gallstones than with forms taken by mouth .Generally women who have breast cancer coronary artery disease or blood clots in the legs who have had a stroke or who have risk factors for these disorders should not takeestrogentherapy .Combination hormone therapy reduces the risk of the followingOsteoporosisColorectal cancerProgestogens have some benefitsEndometrial cancer Progestogens prevent endometrial cancer in women who have a uterus and are taking estrogen .Hot flashes High dose progestogens can relieve hot flashes . But they are not as effective asestrogen.Lower risk of blood clots thanestrogenProgestogens are an option for some women who are at high risk of forming blood clots and cannot useestrogentherapy .Progestogens may increase the risk of the followingIncrease in LDL the unhealthy cholesterol levels Progestogens may have this effect . However micronizedprogesteronea natural rather than syntheticprogesteroneappears to have a less negative effect on LDL levels than synthetic progestins .Blood clots in the legs and lungs .The effect of a progestogen alone on the risk of other disorders is not clear .Side effects ofestrogenand progestogens especially at high doses may include nausea breast tenderness headache fluid retention and mood changes .Estrogenand or a progestogen can be taken in several waysEstrogenprogestogen or combined tablets taken by mouth oral formEstrogenlotions sprays or gels applied externally to the skin topical formEstrogenor combination estrogen progestogen skin patches transdermal formProgestogen releasing intrauterine deviceEstrogencreams tablets rings or suppositories inserted into the vagina vaginal formAstabletstaken by mouthestrogenand a progestogen may be taken as two tablets or as a combination tablet . Commonlyestrogenand a progestogen are taken every day . This schedule may result in irregular vaginal bleeding during the first year or more of therapy . However if bleeding starts or continues women should contact their doctor to see if further evaluation is needed . Alternativelyestrogenmay be taken daily with a progestogen taken for 12 to 14 days each month . With this schedule most women have monthly vaginal bleeding on the days after they take progestogen .Vaginal formsofestrogenare inserted into the vagina . These forms includeA cream that is inserted with a plastic applicatorA tablet that is inserted with or without a plastic applicatorA ring that containsestrogenThere are many different products which come in different doses and which contain different types ofestrogen. Creams and rings may contain a high or low dose ofestrogen. If a high dose ofestrogenis used in vaginal forms women are also given a progestogen to reduce the risk of endometrial cancer . Usually a low dose is sufficient for vaginal symptoms .Using a vaginal form ofestrogenmay be more effective than takingestrogenby mouth for symptoms that affect the vagina such as drying or thinning . Such treatment helps prevent intercourse from being painful lessens urinary urgency and reduces the risk of bladder infections .As alotion spray or gelestrogencan be applied to the skin .As apatchestrogenorestrogenplus a progestogen can also be applied to the skin .SERMs function likeestrogenin some ways but reverse the effects ofestrogenWhen women take a SERM hot flashes may temporarily worsen .Bazedoxifene is a SERM that is given withestrogenin a combination tablet progestogen is not needed with thisestrogenand bazedoxifene combination . Bazedoxifene can relieve hot flashes and symptoms of vaginal atrophy reduce breast tenderness improve sleep and prevent bone loss . Likeestrogenthis medication increases the risk of blood clots in the legs and lungs but it may reduce the risk of endometrial cancer and affect the breast less .Dehydroepiandrosterone DHEA is a steroid hormone that is produced in the adrenal glands and that is converted into sex hormonesestrogensand androgens . It is available as a suppository to be placed in the vagina . DHEA appears to relieve vaginal dryness and other symptoms of vaginal atrophy . It is also used to reduce pain during sexual intercourse due to vaginal atrophy .