Osteoporosis is a condition in which a decrease in the density of bones weakens the bones making breaks fractures likely .Agingestrogendeficiency lowvitamin Dor calcium intake and certain disorders can decrease the amounts of the components that maintain bone density and strength .Osteoporosis may not cause symptoms until a bone fracture occurs .Fractures can occur with little or no force and may occur after a minor fall .Although fractures are often painful some fractures of the spine do not cause pain but can cause deformities .Doctors diagnose people at risk by testing their bone density .Osteoporosis can usually be prevented and treated by managing risk factors ensuring adequate calcium andvitamin Dintake engaging in weight bearing exercise and taking bisphosphonates or other medications .Bones containmineralsincludingcalciumandphosphoruswhich make them hard and dense . To maintain bone density or bone mass the body requires an adequate supply of calcium and other minerals and must produce the proper amounts of several hormones such asparathyroid hormonegrowth hormonecalcitoninestrogenandtestosterone. An adequate supply ofis needed to absorb calcium from food and incorporate it into bones .Vitamin Dis absorbed from the diet and also manufactured in the skin using sunlight .So that bones can adjust to the changing demands placed on them they are continuously broken down and reformed . This process is known asremodeling. In this process small areas of bone tissue are continuously removed and new bone tissue is deposited . Remodeling affects the shape and density of the bones . In youth the bones grow in width and length as the body grows . In later life bones may sometimes enlarge in width but do not continue to grow longer .Loss of Bone Density in WomenIn women bone density or mass progressively increases until about age 30 when bones are at their strongest . After that bone density gradually decreases . The decrease in bone density accelerates after menopause which occurs on average around age 51 .Because more bone is formed than is broken down in the young adult years bones progressively increase in density until about age 30 when they are at their strongest . After that as breakdown exceeds formation bones slowly decrease in density . If the body is unable to maintain an adequate amount of bone formation bones continue to lose density and may become increasingly fragile eventually resulting in osteoporosis .Types of OsteoporosisOsteoporosis is more common in women . It affects almost 20 1 in 5 of women aged 50 and over and almost 5 1 in 20 of men aged 50 and over . Approximately 50 of postmenopausal women and 20 of men over age 50 years will sustain an osteoporosis related fracture in their lifetimes . There are two main types of osteoporosisPrimary osteoporosisOccurs spontaneouslySecondary osteoporosisIs caused by another disorder or by a medicationNearly all occurrences of osteoporosis in both men and women are primary . Most cases occur in postmenopausal women and in older men .A major cause of osteoporosis is a lack ofestrogenparticularly the rapid decrease that occurs atmenopause. Most men over 50 have higherestrogenlevels than postmenopausal women but these levels also decline with aging and lowestrogenlevels are associated with osteoporosis in both men and women .Estrogendeficiency increases bone breakdown and results in rapid bone loss . In men low levels of male sex hormones also contribute to osteoporosis . Bone loss is even greater if calcium intake orvitamin Dlevels are low .result incalcium deficiencyand increased activity of the parathyroid glands causes the glands to release too muchparathyroid hormoneseehyperparathyroidismwhich can also stimulate bone breakdown . Bone production also decreases .A number of other factors such as certain medications tobacco use heavy alcohol use a family history of osteoporosis for example if a person s mother or father has had a hip fracture and small body stature increase the risk of bone loss and the development of osteoporosis in women . These risk factors are also important in men .Examples of disorders that may cause secondary osteoporosis arechronic kidney diseaseand hormonal disorders especiallyCushing diseasehyperparathyroidismhyperthyroidismhypogonadismhigh levels of prolactin anddiabetes mellitus. Certain types of cancer such asmultiple myelomacan cause secondary osteoporosis as can other diseases such asceliac diseaseandrheumatoid arthritis. Examples of medications that if used for a long time may cause secondary osteoporosis areprogesteronecorticosteroids thyroid hormones certain chemotherapy medications and antiseizure medications . Excessive alcohol and cigarette smoking may contribute to osteoporosis .Risk Factors for Primary OsteoporosisFamily members with osteoporosisA diet that is low in calcium andvitamin DSedentary lifestyleThin buildEarly menopauseCigarette smokingExcessive alcohol consumptionIdiopathic osteoporosis is a rare type of osteoporosis . The wordidiopathicsimply means that the cause is unknown . This type of osteoporosis occurs in premenopausal women in men under age 50 and in children and adolescents who have normal hormone levels normalvitamin Dlevels and no obvious reason to have weak bones .Symptoms of OsteoporosisAt first osteoporosis causes no symptoms because bone density loss occurs very gradually . Some people never develop symptoms . However when osteoporosis causes bones to break fracture people may have pain depending on the location of the fracture . Fractures tend to heal slowly in people who have osteoporosis and may lead to deformities such as curvature of the spine .In long bones such as the bones of the arms and legs the fracture usually occurs at the ends of the bones rather than in the middle . Long bone fractures typically are painful .The bones of the spine vertebrae are particularly at risk of fracture due to osteoporosis . These fractures are the most common osteoporosis related fracture . They usually occur in the middle to lower back . Typically the drum shaped body of one or more vertebrae collapses into itself and becomes compressed into a wedge shape . Thesevertebral compression fracturesmay occur in people who have any type of osteoporosis including those on medications that cause bone density loss and increased risk of fracture . The weakened vertebrae may collapse spontaneously or after a slight injury .Most of these vertebral compression fractures do not cause pain . However pain can develop usually starting suddenly staying in a particular area of the back and worsening when a person stands or walks . The area may be tender . Usually the pain and tenderness begin to go away gradually after 1 week . However lingering pain may last for months or be constant . If several vertebrae break an abnormal curvature of the spine may develop causing muscle strain and soreness as well as deformity .Fragility fracturesare fractures that result from a relatively minor strain or fall such as a fall from a standing height or less including a fall out of bed that normally would not cause a fracture in a healthy bone . Fragility fractures commonly occur in the wrist hip and spinevertebral compression fractures. Other bones include theupper arm bone humerusand thepelvis.Hip fractureone of the most serious fractures is a major cause of disability and loss of independence in older adults .Wrist fracturesoccur often especially in people with postmenopausal osteoporosis .People who have had one fracture in which osteoporosis had been a factor are at much higher risk of having more such fractures .Fractures of thenoseribscollarboneknee cap andbones in the feetare not considered osteoporosis related fractures .Did You Know . . .People who have had one osteoporosis related fracture are at much higher risk of having more of these fractures .Diagnosis of OsteoporosisBone density testingTests for causes and risk factorsA doctor may suspect osteoporosis in the following peopleAll women age 65 or olderWomen between menopause and age 65 who have risk factors for osteoporosisAll men and women who have had a previous fracture caused by little or no force even if the fracture occurred at a young agePeople whose bones appear less dense on x rays or who have vertebral compression fractures on x raysPeople who are at risk of developingsecondary osteoporosisIf osteoporosis is suspected and people have not hadx raysdoctors may order imaging to diagnose a fracture . Certain findings on x rays suggest osteoporosis but the diagnosis of osteoporosis is confirmed bybone density testing.Bone density testing can be used to detect or confirm suspected osteoporosis even before a fracture occurs .Dual energy x ray absorptiometry DXA scanis the most useful test of bone density . The DXA scan takes high energy and low energy x rays of the spine and hip which are the sites at which major fractures are likely to occur . The difference between the high and low energy x ray readings allows doctors to calculate bone density . The result is reported as a T score which compares a person s bone density to the density of a healthy person of the same sex and race ethnicity at the age of peak bone mass which is about age 30 . The lower the bone density the lower the T score . A T score of 2 . 5 or lower defines osteoporosis .DXA scans are painless involve very little radiation and can be done in about 10 to 15 minutes . They may be useful for monitoring the response to treatment as well as for making the diagnosis . DXA scans may also reveal osteopenia a condition in which bone density is decreased but not as severely as in osteoporosis . People who have osteopenia also have an increased risk of fractures . It is important for your doctor to calculate a fracture risk assessment FRAX score which provides an estimate of your risk for fracture .People who are already taking abisphosphonateor ananabolic agentshould have repeat DXA scans to monitor the effectiveness of the treatment .Blood tests may be done to measure calciumvitamin Dand levels of certain hormones .Further testing may be needed to rule out treatable conditions that might lead to osteoporosis . If such a condition is found the diagnosis is calledsecondary osteoporosis.Treatment of OsteoporosisCalcium andvitamin DWeight bearing exerciseMedicationsTreatment of fracturesOsteoporosis treatment involves ensuring adequate intake of calcium andvitamin Dand engaging inweight bearing exercisessuch as walking climbing stairs or weight training all of which strengthen bones . Treatment with medications is usually recommended . When treating people who have osteoporosis doctors also manage conditions and risk factors that can contribute to ongoing bone loss .Consuming an adequate amount of nutrients particularly calcium andvitamin Dis helpful especially before maximum bone density is reached around age 30 but also after this time .Vitamin Dhelps the body absorb calcium .All men and women should consume at least 1 000 milligrams of calcium each day . Postmenopausal women older men children who are going through puberty and women who are pregnant or breastfeeding may need to consume 1 200 to 1 500 milligrams each day . Calcium in food is preferred over calcium supplements . Foods rich in calcium include dairy products such as milk and yogurt certain vegetables such as broccoli nut milks such as almond milk and nuts such as macadamia . See tableAmount of Calcium in Some Foods.People with osteoporosis should consume 600 to 800 international units IUs of supplementalvitamin Deach day . People with osteoporosis who havemay need even higher doses . Sometimes doctors check the level ofvitamin Din the blood to determine how much supplementalvitamin Dshould be taken . The most common food source is fortified foods mainly cereals and dairy products .Vitamin Dis also present in fish liver oils and fatty fish . Supplementalvitamin Dis usually given as cholecalciferol the natural form ofvitamin Dor ergocalciferol the synthetic plant derived form .Weight bearing exercise such aswalkingand stair climbing increases bone density . Exercises that do not involve weight bearing such asswimmingdo not increase bone density but do increase core strength and balance and reduce the risk of falls . Most experts recommend about 30 minutes of weight bearing exercise daily . Aphysical therapistcan develop a safe exercise program for people and demonstrate how to safely perform daily activities to minimize the risk of falls and spine fractures .In premenopausal women high levels of exercise such as those maintained by athletes without adequate dietary intake can lead to weight loss and amenorrhea absence of menstrual cycles which can cause a reduction in bone density .Bisphosphonatesdifficulty swallowingWomen who are pregnant or nursingPeople who have low levels of calcium in the bloodPeople who have severe kidney diseaseMost people need to take these medications for 3 or 5 years but some people at particularly high risk for fracture may need to take them longer . How long people need to take a bisphosphonate is determined by the doctor and is based on a person s medical condition and risk factors for fracture . During and after treatment with a bisphosphonate doctors usually perform periodic tests to determine whether bone mass is decreasing . If bone mass is decreasing after stopping a bisphosphonate treatment with a bisphosphonate may be restarted or another medication may be initiated .Osteonecrosis of the jawis a rare condition that has occurred in some people who take bisphosphonatesor. In this condition the jaw bone heals poorly particularly in people who have had invasive dental work involving the jaw bone . The risk of developing osteonecrosis of the jaw is exceptionally low in people taking bisphosphonates and the likely benefits of treating osteoporosis to prevent bone fractures usually far outweigh the potential risks . When used as prescribed bisphosphonates prevent many more fractures than cases of osteonecrosis of the jaw they might cause . People who take bisphosphonates intravenously who have had radiation therapy to the head and neck to treat cancer or a combination are at highest risk .Long term use of bisphosphonates may increase the risk of developing unusual fractures of the thighbone femur . To reduce the risk of these fractures doctors may have people stop taking bisphosphonates for 1 to 2 years or longer . These planned periods of time are called bisphosphonate holidays or drug holidays . How long a bisphosphonate holiday lasts is carefully considered by doctors . Doctors base the decision on certain factors such as a person s age DXA scan results whether they have had fractures and how likely they are to have a fall . People who are on a bisphosphonate holiday should be routinely monitored for decreasing bone density . Because the risk of fracture does increase while people are on a drug holiday doctors try to balance the benefits of the bisphosphonates with the possible side effects .Overall when used as prescribed the benefits of bisphosphonates in preventing bone fractures far outweigh the potential risks .is similar to the bisphosphonates in that it prevents bone loss .Denosumabis given as an injection under the skin in a doctor s office two times a year . Like bisphosphonatesdenosumabvery rarely causesosteonecrosis of the jawand may increase the risk of developing unusual fractures of the thighbone .Denosumabhas been studied in patients with chronic kidney disease and with appropriate monitoring has been found to be safe to use . People takingdenosumabshould not miss doses or undergo a drug holiday because delayed doses or stopping this medication may cause a loss in bone density and may increase the risk of vertebral fractures .is anestrogenlike medication that may be useful in preventing and treating bone loss but it does not have some ofestrogen snegative side effects .Raloxifeneis used in people who cannot or prefer not to take bisphosphonates .Raloxifenecan reduce the risk of vertebral fractures and may reduce the risk ofinvasive breast cancer.testosteronelevel is low .Hormonal therapyfor example with estrogen helps maintain bone density in women and can be used for prevention or treatment . However because the risks of hormonal therapy may exceed its benefits for many women hormonal therapy is usually not the treatment option used . Decisions about using estrogen replacement therapy after menopause are complex seeHormone Therapy for Menopause.which inhibits the breakdown of bone has been studied for treatment of osteoporosis .Calcitoninhas not been shown to reduce fracture risk but it can help relieve pain caused by vertebral fractures .Calcitoninis usually taken by nasal spray . Its use can decrease blood levels of calcium so these levels must be monitored .increases bone density in the hip and lumbar spine and reduces the risk of fracture in postmenopausal women .Romosozumabis given as an injection once a month for 1 year . People should not takeromosozumabwithin 12 months after having had a heart attack or stroke .Anabolic agentsparathyroid hormoneparathyroid hormoneare self injected daily . This therapy is used in some people whoDevelop marked bone loss or new fractures while being treated with a bisphosphonateCannot take bisphosphonatesHave unusually severe osteoporosis or many fractures particularly vertebral fracturesHave osteoporosis caused by corticosteroidsBack pain resulting from avertebral compression fracturecan be treated with pain relievers and sometimesmoist heatandmassageweight bearing exercises.Fractures resulting from osteoporosis must be treated . Forhip fracturesusually the joint is stabilized and often part or all of thehip is replaced surgically. Surgery may be needed for awrist fractureor the wrist may need to be placed in a cast . Additionally people who have had an osteoporosis related fracture should be treated with an osteoporosis medication and should make sure they consume adequate amounts of.A collapsed vertebra can be repaired by a procedure called vertebroplasty . In this procedure a material called methyl methacrylate MMA an acrylic bone cement is injected into the collapsed vertebra helping to relieve pain and reduce deformity . Kyphoplasty is a similar procedure in which a small balloon is used to expand the vertebra before the injection of the MMA . With vertebroplasty and kyphoplasty deformity may be reduced in the MMA injected bone but the risk of fractures in adjacent bones in the spine or ribs does not decrease and may even increase . Other risks may include rib fractures cement leakage and possibly heart or lung problems . When these procedures should be done has not been clearly determined .Prevention of OsteoporosisPrevention of osteoporosis is generally more successful than treatment because it is easier to prevent loss of bone density than to restore density once it has been lost . Prevention measures are recommended for anyone who has bone loss or who has risk factors for bone loss regardless of whether they have had an osteoporosis related fracture . Osteoporosis prevention involvesManaging risk factors for example quitting smoking and avoiding excess alcoholConsuming adequate amounts ofEngaging inweight bearing exercisesuch as walking climbing stairs or weight trainingTakingcertain medicationsfor some people who already have mild bone loss osteopeniaCertain measures can help prevent fractures . Many older people are at risk of falls because of poor coordination and balance poor vision muscle weakness confusion and use of medications that cause light headedness when people stand or of medications that cause confusion .Modifying the home environment for safetyand working with aphysical therapistto develop an exercise program canhelp prevent falls.Strengthening exercisesincluding core strengthening may help improve balance .More InformationThe following English language resource may be useful . Please note that THE MANUAL is not responsible for the content of this resource .Information about preventing osteoporosis and broken bones and promoting strong bones for life