Sexuality is the way in which people experience and express the instincts and feelings that make up sexual attraction for others . It is a normal part of human experience and is determined by several different factors including genetic makeup childhood upbringing influences of those around us and societal attitudes . Accepted norms of sexual behavior and attitudes vary greatly within and among different cultures .Generally what is normal and abnormal cannot be defined medically . However when sexual behavior or difficulties cause significant distress for a person or the person s partner or cause harm treatment is warranted .There are wide variations in people s sexual behavior including interest in sex and the frequency of or need for sexual release throughout life . Some people desire sexual activity several times a day but others are satisfied with infrequent activity for example a few times a year . Although younger people are often reluctant to view older people as sexually interested most older people remain interested in sex and report satisfying sex lives well into old age .See alsoSexual Function and Dysfunction in MenandSexual Function and Dysfunction in Women.Concepts of Sex and Sexual IdentityVarious terms are used to talk about sex and gender . Sex and gender are not the same thing .Sexrefers to a person s anatomy and is often captured in the phrase assigned at birth . A person may be considered to be male AMAB meaning assigned male at birth female AFAB meaning assigned female at birth or not clearly male or female may be described as havingambiguous genitalsor being intersex .Sexual identity sexual orientationis the pattern of emotional romantic and or sexual attractions that people have toward others . It also refers to a person s sense of personal and social identity based on those attractions related behaviors and membership in a community of others with similar attractions and behaviors . There are many different sexual identities such as heterosexual attraction to the opposite sex homosexual attraction to the same sex bisexual attraction to both sexes and asexual attraction to neither sex .Gender identityis different from sexual identity . Gender identity is an internal sense of being male female or something else which may or may not correspond to an individual s sex assigned at birth or sex characteristics seeGender Incongruence and Gender Dysphoria.Developmental Aspects of SexualitySee alsoDevelopment of Sexuality and Gender in Adolescents.Helping adolescents put sexuality and sexual identity into a healthy context is extremely important . Some adolescents struggle with their sexual identity and may be afraid to reveal their sexual identity to friends or family members particularly if they have a non heterosexual identity . Adolescents with a non heterosexual identity are 2 to 3 times more likely to have suicidal and self harming behaviors than their heterosexual peers . Adolescents and their parents should be encouraged to speak openly regarding their attitudes toward sex and sexuality .Parents can damage their children s ability to develop sexual and emotional intimacy by doing things such as the followingBeing emotionally distantPunishing children too severelyBeing overtly seductive and exploiting children sexuallyBeing verbally and physically hostileRejecting childrenBeing cruelParents opinions remain an important determinant of adolescent behavior in spite of the influences of social media and internet sources of information . Social media may form the basis for most information and misinformation on sexuality obtained by adolescents .Changing Attitudes about Sex and SexualitySocietal attitudes about sexuality and gender and what is acceptable vary greatly among cultures and have undergone radical change in some societies . Many people have become more comfortable with their own gender identity how they present themselves to the world and with engaging in sexual activities that might have been considered unacceptable in the past . As a result social norms have been redefined as illustrated by the following examples of attitude changes in Western culture over recent years .Doctors have long recognized that masturbation is a normal sexual activity throughout life . Masturbation is the most common of all human sexual behaviors . About 97 of males and 80 of females have masturbated .Masturbation is considered unhealthy only when it inhibits partner oriented behavior is done in public or is compulsive enough to cause distress or dysfunction in work social or other settings . Although a normal sexual activity masturbation may cause guilt and psychologic suffering that stems from the disapproving attitudes still held by some people . These feelings can result in considerable distress and can even affect sexual performance .Masturbation often continues at some level even in a sexually healthy relationship . People who masturbate may have a better sense of well being better fertility and achieve sexual satisfaction without risk of sexually transmitted infections .Homosexuality is sexual attraction to people of the same sex . Like heterosexuality homosexuality results from complex biologic factors and a person s experiences leading to an ability to become sexually aroused by people of the same sex . And like heterosexuality homosexuality is not a matter of choice . Homosexuality is widely recognized as a sexual orientation that is present from childhood . Adolescents may experiment with same sex play but this experimentation does not necessarily indicate an enduring interest in homosexual or bisexual activity as adults seeDevelopment of Sexuality and Gender in Adolescents.A 2022 Gallup poll of Americans found that the proportion of adults who identify as gay lesbian bisexual or transgender has doubled since 2012 to a total of 7 . 1 . The proportions vary substantially by age group . Among adults who identify as gay lesbian bisexual or transgender 91 of those born between 1946 and 1964 Baby Boomers self identify as straight heterosexual versus 76 of those born between 1997 and 2003 Generation Z . See.For some heterosexuals and homosexuals frequent sexual activity with different partners is a common practice throughout life . In Western cultures this behavior has become more acceptable . However having many sex partners is linked to the transmission of certain diseases such asHIV infectionherpes simplexhepatitissyphilisgonorrheaandhuman papillomaviruswhich causescervical cancerand may also signify difficulty in forming meaningful lasting intimate relationships .In the United States most people engage in sexual activity before they are married or while they are not married . This behavior is part of the trend toward more sexual freedom in industrialized countries . However most cultures discourage married people from engaging in sex with someone other than their spouse . This behavior occurs frequently despite social disapproval . One objective problem that results is the possible spread ofsexually transmitted infectionsto unsuspecting spouses or sex partners .Sexual ProblemsWhen sexual feelings behavior or dysfunction cause significant distress for a person or the person s partner or harms another person the person may need to be evaluated by a health care professional and treated . For example people who have frequent intense sexually arousing fantasies or behaviors that involve inanimate objects children or nonconsenting adults or that involve suffering or humiliation of oneself or the partnerparaphiliasmay feel distressed by the paraphilia and seek or be referred for treatment .Sexual problems may have physical causes psychologic causes or both . Problems with sexual function can affect both men and women . Men may experiencedecreased libidoerectile dysfunctiontheinability to ejaculateorpremature ejaculation. Women may experiencelow sexual interestor asexual arousal disorderpain during sexual intercoursegenito pelvic pain penetration disorderor problems with orgasmfemale orgasmic disorder. Sexual problems tend to be more common among older people . Many of these problems can be effectively treated .