Sexual dysfunction in women includes pain during intercourse involuntary painful contractions spasms of the muscles around the vagina vaginismus lack of interest in sex low libido and problems with arousal or orgasm . For a sexual dysfunction disorder to be diagnosed these problems must cause distress to the woman .Sexual problems in women may have physical causes psychological causes or often a combination with each impacting the other .To diagnose sexual issues doctors often talk with the woman and sometimes her partner a pelvic examination is often necessary when the woman has pain or problems with orgasm .Treatment of sexual problems in women varies by cause but may include education about sexual function medications pelvic physical therapy or psychotherapy or sex therapy .Women commonly have concerns about sexual function . If the problems are severe enough to cause distress they may be considered sexual dysfunction . Approximately 12 of women in the United States have sexual dysfunction .Sexual dysfunction can be described and diagnosed in terms of specific problems such as the followingLack of interest in sexual activity and or difficulty becoming aroused calledsexual interest arousal disorderInvoluntary tightening of the muscles around the vagina or pain during sexual activity calledgenito pelvic pain penetration disorderDifficulty reaching orgasm despite normal interest in sexual activity calledfemale orgasmic disorderSubstance medication induced sexual dysfunctionOther sexual dysfunction doctors refer to this as other specified and unspecified sexual dysfunctionInsubstance medication induced sexual dysfunctionsexual dysfunction is related to initiation change in dose or stopping of a substance including illicit drugs or medication .Other sexual dysfunctionincludes sexual dysfunction that does not fit in the other categories . It includes sexual dysfunction that has no identifiable cause or that does not precisely meet the criteria for a specific sexual dysfunction disorder .Persistent genital arousal disorderis a rare disorder that can occur in both men and women but does not have specific criteria for diagnosis . Women with persistent genital arousal disorder experience excess physical arousal indicated by increased blood flow to the genital organs and increased vaginal secretion but sexual desire is absent . No cause for the arousal is identified and arousal does not usually resolve after orgasm .Often women with sexual dysfunction have features of more than one specific issue . For example women who have pain during sex or have difficulty becoming aroused usually enjoy sex less and may have difficulty reaching orgasm .A woman s sexual response is strongly influenced by her mental health and by the quality of her relationship with her partner . Initial desire typically lessens with age but increases with a new partner at any age .Normal Sexual FunctionSexual function and responses involve mind thoughts and emotions and body including the nervous circulatory and hormonal systems . Sexual response includesDesire also called interest or libidoArousalOrgasmResolutionDesire is the wish to engage in or continue sexual activity . Sexual interest or desire may be triggered by thoughts words sights smells or touch . Desire may be obvious at the outset or may build once sexual activity and stimulation begin .For women sexual desire and arousal are often closely related . Sexual stimulation can trigger excitement and pleasure and physical responses including increased blood flow to the genital area . Desire for sexual satisfaction builds as sexual activity and intimacy continue .Arousal has a subjective element sexual excitement that is felt and thought about . It also has a physical element an increase in blood flow to the genital area . Blood flow may increase without the woman being aware of it and without her feeling aroused . In women the increased blood flow causes the clitoris and vaginal walls to swell a process called engorgement . The increased blood flow also causes vaginal secretions which provide lubrication to increase .This reflexive response that causes engorgement and lubrication occurs within seconds of a sexual stimulus . The brain sensing something sexual not necessarily as erotic or subjectively arousing triggers this response . During this response genital tingling and throbbing are more typically reported by younger women . As women age the genital blood flow from sexual stimuli decreases but lubrication in response to sexual stimuli may not .Orgasm is the peak or climax of sexual excitement . Just before orgasm muscle tension throughout the body increases . As orgasm begins the muscles around the vagina contract rhythmically . Women may have several orgasms . Hormones released at orgasm may contribute to the sense of well being relaxation or fatigue that follows resolution .Resolution is a sense of well being and widespread muscular relaxation . Resolution typically follows orgasm . However resolution can occur slowly after highly arousing sexual activity without orgasm . Some women can respond to additional stimulation almost immediately after resolution .CausesMany factors cause or contribute to the various types of sexual dysfunction . Traditionally causes are considered physical or psychological . However the two types of causes cannot be separated . Psychological factors can cause physical changes in the brain nerves hormones and eventually the genital organs . Physical changes can have psychological effects which in turn have more physical effects . Some factors are related more to the situation than to the woman . Also the cause of sexual dysfunction is often unclear .Depressionandanxietycommonly contribute to sexual dysfunction . Sometimes when the depression is effectively treated the sexual dysfunction improves also . However some types of antidepressants selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors may also cause sexual dysfunction .Did You Know . . .Taking a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor a type of antidepressant can interfere with sexual function but so can untreated depression .Various fears of letting go of being rejected or of losing control and low self esteem can contribute to sexual dysfunction .Previous experiences can affect a woman s psychological and sexual development causing problems as in the followingNegative sexual or other experiences including sexual trauma may lead to low self esteem shame or guilt .Emotional physical or sexual abuse during childhood or adolescence can teach children to control and hide emotions a useful defense mechanism . However women who control and hide emotions may have difficulty expressing sexual feelings .If women lose a parent or another loved one during childhood they may have difficulty becoming intimate with a sex partner because they are afraid of a similar loss sometimes without being aware of it .Various sexual worries can impair sexual function . For example women may be worried about unwanted consequences of sex such as pregnancy or a sexually transmitted infections or about their or their partner s sexual performance .Factors related to a woman s current situation called contextual factors that may impact sexual function includeSelf image For example women may have a low sexual self image if they have a negative body image urinary incontinence are having fertility problems or have had surgery to remove a breast the uterus or another body part associated with sex .Relationship Women may not trust or may have negative feelings about their partner . They may feel less attracted to their partner than earlier in their relationship .Surroundings The setting may not be erotic private or safe enough for sexual expression .Culture Women may come from a culture that restricts sexual expression or activity . Cultures sometimes make women feel ashamed or guilty about sexuality . Women and their partners may come from cultures that view certain sexual practices differently .Distractions or emotional stress Family work finances or other things can preoccupy women and thus interfere with sexual arousal .Various physical conditions hormones medications and illicit drugs may lead or contribute to sexual dysfunction . Hormonal changes which may occur with aging or result from a disorder can interfere .Aftermenopausechanges in the vagina and urinary tract calledgenitourinary syndrome of menopausecan affect sexual function . For example the tissues of the vagina can become thin dry and inelastic after menopause becauseestrogenlevels decrease . This condition called vulvovaginal atrophy or atrophic vaginitis can make intercourse painful . Urinary symptoms that can occur at menopause include a compelling need to urinate urinary urgency and frequent urinary tract infections .Similar symptoms can also result from removal of both ovaries and hormonal changes that occur after a baby is deliveredpostpartum.Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors SSRIsa type of antidepressant commonly cause problems with sexual function . These medications may contribute to several types of sexual dysfunction .Alcoholcan also cause problems with sexual function .DiagnosisInterview with the woman and sometimes her partnerPelvic examinationA sexual dysfunction disorder is typically diagnosed when symptoms have been present for at least 6 months and cause significant distress . Some women may not be distressed or bothered by decreased or absent sexual desire interest arousal or orgasm . In such cases a disorder is not diagnosed .Female sexual dysfunction can be characterized by at least one of the followingPain during sexual activitiesLoss of sexual desireImpaired arousalInability to achieve orgasmDiagnosis of sexual dysfunction disorders involves detailed questioning of the woman and sometimes her partner . Doctors first ask the woman to describe the problem in her own words . Then doctors ask about the followingSymptomsOther disordersGynecologic and obstetric procedures doneInjuries to the pelvic areaSexual traumaIllicit drug useRelationship with her partnerSexual function problems in her partnerMoodSelf esteemChildhood relationshipsPast sexual experiencesPersonality traits such as her ability to trust tendency to be anxious and need to feel in controlDoctors do a pelvic examination to look for abnormalities in the external and internal genital organs including the vulva vagina and cervix . Doctors can often identify where pain is coming from . Some women with sexual pain or a history of sexual trauma find it difficult to have a pelvic examination . This can be discussed with the doctor before the examination . Some strategies for making a pelvic examination more tolerable are as followsA woman and her doctor can discuss the examination before it begins and agree on how to communicate during the examination .A woman can hold a mirror to be able to see what the doctor sees during the examination and allow the doctor to show her any issues that are detected .A woman can place her hand on the doctor s hand to have a greater sense of control during the examination .However if doctors suspect a sexually transmitted infection or another infection such as ayeast infectionorbacterial vaginosisthey may insert a speculum instrument into the vagina to be able to see the vagina and cervix as done during a Papanicolaou or Pap test and take a sample of fluids from the vagina or cervix and send it to a laboratory to be tested .TreatmentTreatment of causes of sexual painMedications including hormone therapyPelvic physical therapySometimes personal or couple s psychotherapy or sex therapyCertain treatments depend on the cause of sexual dysfunction . However some general measures can help regardless of the causeFor both partners learning about the woman s anatomy and ways to increase libido or arouse herImproving communication including about sex between the woman and her partnerEncouraging trust respect and emotional intimacy between partners These qualities should be cultivated with or without professional help . Couples may need help learning to resolve conflicts which can interfere with their relationship .Setting aside time together that does not involve sexual activity Couples who talk to each other regularly are more likely to want and enjoy sexual activity together .Making time and space for sexual activity Women may be preoccupied with or distracted by other activities involving work household chores or children . Making sure the place is private can help if the woman is afraid of discovery or interruption . Enough time should be allowed and a setting that encourages sexual feelings may help .Engaging in many types of sexual activities For example stroking and kissing responsive parts of the body and touching each other s genitals enough before initiating intercourse may enhance intimacy and lessen anxiety .Taking steps to prevent unwanted consequences Such measures are particularly useful when fear of pregnancy or sexually transmitted infections inhibits desire .Practicing mindfulness Mindfulness involves learning to focus on what is happening in the moment without making judgments about or monitoring what is happening . Being mindful helps free women from distractions and enables them to pay attention to sensations during sexual activity by staying in the moment . Resources for learning how to practice mindfulness are available on the Internet .Just becoming aware of what is required for a healthy sexual response may be enough to help women change their thinking and behavior . However more than one treatment is often required because many women have more than one type of sexual dysfunction . Sometimes a multidisciplinary team including primary care physicians gynecologists pain specialists psychotherapists sex therapists and or physical therapists is needed .Estrogen therapycan be used to treat sexual dysfunction in women with genitourinary syndrome of menopause . When women have only vaginal and urinary symptoms doctors usually prescribe forms of estrogen that are inserted into the vagina as a cream with a plastic applicator as a tablet or in a ring . Estrogen cream may also be applied externally to the vulva . These treatments can effectively treat symptoms that affect the vagina such as dryness and thinning of the vagina an urgent need to urinate and frequent urinary tract infections but they do not help with moodiness hot flashes or sleep problems .Prasteronea synthetic form ofdehydroepiandrosteroneDHEA inserted as a suppository into the vagina can also relieve vaginal dryness and make sex less painful for postmenopausal women .aselective estrogen receptor modulatorcan be used to treat genitourinary syndrome of menopause in women who cannot apply vaginal hormone therapy .Becauseselective serotonin reuptake inhibitorsFor postmenopausal women who are taking a full body dose of estrogen and a progestogen addingtestosteronedoctors must regularly check for side effects such as acne excess hair growthhirsutismand development of masculine characteristicsvirilization.Psychological therapies may help women with sexual problems . For example cognitive behavioral therapy can help women recognize a negative self view that results from illness or infertility . Mindfulness based cognitive therapy combines cognitive behavioral therapy with the practice of mindfulness . As in cognitive behavioral therapy women are encouraged to identify negative thoughts . Women are then encouraged to simply observe these thoughts and to recognize that they are just thoughts and may not reflect reality . This approach can make such thoughts less distracting and disruptive . Mindfulness based cognitive therapy can be used to treat sexual interest arousal disorder and pain that occurs whenever pressure is put on the opening to the vagina called provoked vestibulodynia a type ofgenito pelvic pain penetration disorder.More in depth psychotherapy may be needed when issues from childhood such as sexual trauma are interfering with sexual function .Couples therapy may be helpful to improve communication or address relationship issues . Sex therapy often helps women and their partner deal with issues that affect their sexual life such as specific sexual problems and their relationship with each other .Several types of physical therapy may be useful in women with genito pelvic pain penetration disorder .Physical therapists can use several techniques to stretch and relax tight pelvic musclesSoft tissue mobilization and myofascial release Using various movements such as rhythmic pushing or massage to apply pressure on and stretch the affected muscles or the tissues that cover muscles myofasciaeTrigger point pressure Applying pressure to very sensitive areas of the affected muscles which may be where the pain starts trigger pointsElectrical stimulation Applying gentle electric current through a device positioned at the opening of the vaginaBladder trainingandbowel retrainingHaving women follow a strict regimen for urination and recommending exercises to strengthen the muscles around the urethra and anus sometimes with biofeedbackTherapeutic ultrasonography Applying energy produced by high frequency sound waves to the affected muscles increasing blood flow to the area enhancing healing and relaxing tight musclesIf tight pelvic muscles are making sexual activity painful women can insert self dilation devices available by prescription and over the counter to stretch and to make the vagina less sensitive . Sexual activity may then be more comfortable .Vaginal lubricants and moisturizers can reduce vaginal dryness which causes pain during intercourse . These treatments include food based oils such as coconut oil silicone based lubricants and water based products . Water based lubricants dry out quickly and may have to be reapplied but they are preferred over petroleum jelly and other oil based lubricants . Food based oils can damage latex contraceptive devices such as condoms and diaphragms . They should not be used with condoms . Silicone based lubricants can be used with condoms and diaphragms as can water based lubricants . Women can ask their doctor which type of lubricant would be best for them .Depending on the type of dysfunction sexual skills training for example instruction in masturbation and exercises to facilitate communication with a partner about sexual needs and preferences can be implemented .Devices such as vibrators or clitoral suction devices may be used by women with sexual interest arousal or orgasmic disorder but there is little evidence to support their effectiveness . Many of these products are available over the counter .Spotlight on Aging Sexual Dysfunction in Older WomenA major reason older women give up on sex is lack of a sexually functional partner . However age related changes particularly those due tomenopausecan make women more likely to experience sexual dysfunction . Also medical conditions that can interfere with sexual function such asdiabetesatherosclerosisurinary tract infectionsandarthritisbecome more common as women age . However these changes need not end sexual activity and pleasure and not all sexual dysfunction in older women is caused by age related changes .In older women as in younger women the most common problem is lack of interest in sex .After menopause lessestrogenis produced .The tissues around the vaginal opening labia and the walls of the vagina become less elastic and thinner called vulvovaginal atrophy . Tissues can also become inflamed and irritated because production ofestrogenis decreased called atrophic vaginitis . Both of these changes can cause pain during sexual activity that involves penetration .Vaginal secretions are reduced providing less lubrication during sexual intercourse .The acidity of the vagina decreases making the genitals more likely to become irritated and infected .Lack ofestrogenmay contribute to age related weakening of muscles and other supportive tissues in the pelvis sometimes allowing a pelvic organ bladder intestine uterus or rectum to protrude into the vagina calledpelvic organ prolapse. As a result urine may leak involuntarily causing embarrassment .With aging blood flow to the vagina is reduced causing it to become shorter narrower and drier . Blood vessel disorders such asatherosclerosiscan reduce blood flow even more .Less and lesstestosteroneis produced starting when women are in their 30s andtestosteroneproduction stops by about age 70 . Whether this decrease leads to decreased sexual interest and response is unclear .Other problems may interfere with sexual function . For example older women may be distressed by changes in their body caused by medical conditions surgery or aging itself . They may have cultural views that sexual desire and fantasy are improper or shameful at an older age . They may be worried about the general health or sexual function of their partner .Many older women are interested in sex . Older women should not assume that sexual dysfunction is normal for older age . If sexual dysfunction is bothering them they should talk to their doctor . In many cases treating a health condition including depression stopping or substituting a medication learning more about sexual function or talking to a health care professional or counselor can help .Vaginal dryness or painful sex due to menopause can be treated with vaginal hormone therapy including low dose estrogen as a cream tablet or ring or dehydroepiandrosterone DHEA as a suppository .Estrogenmay be taken by mouth or applied to the skin in a patch or gel but these forms ofestrogenaffect the whole body and are usually only used if a woman also has other symptoms of menopause such as hot flashes and are usually not given to women older than 60 years .Estrogenhas potential risks including blood clots and a slightly increased risk of breast cancer as well as benefits so women should talk to their doctor about its risks and benefits before starting to take it .