There are manybenefits of exercise. Exercise is one of the most effective and when done properly safest ways to enhance health and wellness . For example exercise can strengthen the cardiovascular system lower blood pressure improve the levels of fats cholesterol and sugar in the blood strengthen muscles prevent falls and improve mood . As a result people may function better live longer and avoid many common disorders . Benefits of exercise usually far exceed the possible harms .Still harms are possible . Too much weight bearing or resistance exercise can contribute to joint wear and tear increasing the risk and severity of osteoarthritis . Also people with certain disorders must restrict their activity . For example people with coronary artery disease must restrict the intensity of their aerobic exercise .Aspects of any exercise program include itsFrequency how oftenIntensity how hardTime how longTypeThe general principle behind all types of exercise is that your body responds to increased physical demands by becoming more capable stronger faster more efficient . Different types of exercise place demands on different components of your body .General categories of exercise include the followingAerobic exerciseStrength resistance exerciseFlexibility stretching exerciseBalance exercisePeople should consult their doctor before beginning competitive sports or an exercise program seeStarting an Exercise Programand seek information from their doctor professionals at local fitness facilities and or published information from reputable sources onexercising safelyandchoosing the right exercise.Exercise ProgramsEach type of exercise has different goals and benefits as well as the kinds of equipment and facilities that are required . For beginners it can be hard to know where to start when designing an exercise program . Whatever exercise is chosen it is important to learn to do the exercises properly to maximize benefit and minimize risk of injury . Local fitness centers can be a good resource for information regarding safe and effective training . Fitness centers usually also offer exercise classes and or personal trainers that can introduce people to different types of exercise . Many people find that taking an exercise class helps keep them motivated to continue and minimizes the need to come up with their own program . However even if fitness centers are unavailable or unaffordable there are many ways people can exercise effectively with minimal equipment .Exercise has similar benefits whether done alone self directed or using an instructional video in a group in person or virtually or with a personal trainer . Preferences vary from one person to another but the most beneficial method of exercise is one that an individual will do consistently . Just as with dieting the theoretically best exercise program is of no use if people cannot stick with it and a merely adequate exercise program that people enjoy and will do regularly will provide good long term benefit .Consider the idea of diminishing returns when thinking about the amount of exercise required as opposed to tolerated to achieve a particular outcome or goal . A small amount of exercise may yield some results but perhaps not the full or intended results . More activity would be required to generate desired results but at some point the harm outweighs the benefit . For example 25 more work may yield 5 better results but place more strain on the person s joints and mental and physical capabilities and the additional work may require more recovery time . Therefore structure an exercise program to increase the overall demands for example how much or how hard to exercise only gradually .More InformationThe following English language resources may be useful . Please note that THE MANUAL is not responsible for the content of these resources .Basic information about the importance of physical activity with guidance for different age groupsArticles and videos about physical fitness in older adultsExercise and fitness information tailored to women s health needsInformation on the health benefits of physical activity with resources including exercise videos logs and planners