Contraception is prevention of ovulation stopping the ovaries from releasing eggs or prevention offertilizationof an egg by a sperm conception or prevention of attachment of a fertilized egg to the lining of the uterusimplantation.Did You Know . . .The effectiveness of certain contraceptive measures such as the pill or rhythm methods depends a great deal on how well instructions are followed .Contraception birth control is used to prevent pregnancy . Contraceptive methods may be temporary for example birth control pills or an intrauterine device orpermanentintended to avoid pregnancy permanently for examplevasectomyortubal sterilization. Abortion is a procedure that interrupts a pregnancy . It is used to end an unintended pregnancy when contraception has failed or has not been used .There are many methods of contraception . None is completely effective but some methods are far more reliable than others . Effectiveness often depends on which method is used and how closely people follow instructions . Thus the effectiveness of a birth control method can be described in two waysHow well it prevents pregnancy when used by most people typical useHow well it prevents pregnancy when instructions for use are followed exactly perfect useFor example oral contraceptives birth control pills are very effective if a woman takes them every day perfect use . However forgetting to take a few pills typical use decreases the effectiveness . In contrast intrauterine devices IUDs once inserted require nothing more until they need to be replaced . Thus typical use is usually the same as perfect use . People tend to follow instructions more closely as they get used to a method . As a result the difference between effectiveness with perfect use and with typical use often decreases as time passes .Besides its degree of effectiveness each contraceptive method has other advantages and disadvantages . Choice of method depends on preferences degree of reliability needed and medical considerations .Despite the higher pregnancy rate associated with condom use compared to other methods condoms primarily latex and synthetic condoms provide protection against all common sexually transmitted infections STIs including human immunodeficiency virus HIV infection . As part of safer sex practices condoms should be used even when another birth control method is also being used .If unprotected sex occursemergency contraceptionmay help prevent an unintended pregnancy . Emergency contraception should not be used as a routine form of contraception .More InformationThe following English language resource may be useful . Please note that THE MANUAL is not responsible for the content of this resource .This web site provides information about birth control abortion and other subjects related to reproduction .