Integrative medicine and health IMH and complementary and alternative medicine CAM include a variety of healing approaches and therapies that historically have not been included in conventional Western medicine . Many aspects of CAM are rooted in ancient indigenous systems of healing such as those of China India Tibet Africa and the Americas .Complementary alternative and integrative medicine are terms often used interchangeably but their meanings are different .Complementary medicinerefers to non conventional practices usedtogether withconventional mainstream medicine .Alternative medicinerefers to non conventional practices usedinstead ofconventional medicine .Integrative medicineis health care that uses all appropriate therapeutic approaches conventional and non conventional within a framework that focuses on health the therapeutic relationship and the whole person .Although the distinction between conventional medicine and IMH or CAM is not always easy to determine a basic philosophical difference exists . Conventional medicine tends to base its practices on the best scientific evidence available . In contrast CAM tends to base its practices on evidence informed practices evidence that may not necessarily meet the highest strictest criteria for efficacy and safety . However some CAM practices including use of somedietary supplementshave been validated by the traditional high strict scientific criteria . Conventional medicine generally defines health as the absence of disease or dysfunction . The main causes of disease and dysfunction are usually considered to be identifiable factors such as bacteria or viruses biochemical imbalances and aging and treatments often involve medications or surgery . In contrast IMH and CAM practices often define health holistically that is as a balance of systems physical emotional and spiritual involving the whole person . Disharmony among these systems is thought to contribute to illness . Treatment involves strengthening the body s own defenses and restoring these balances .Acceptance and UseIMH aims to combine CAM with conventional medicine when appropriate . Some CAM therapies are now offered in hospitals and are sometimes reimbursed by insurance companies .Acupunctureand somemanual manipulation treatmentsfor example chiropractic or osteopathic manipulation are examples . Because interest in and use of CAM are increasing more and more medical school curricula are including information about CAM treatments such as acupuncturebotanical medicinemanual manipulation treatments and homeopathy .As many as 38 of adults and 12 of children have used CAM at some point depending on how broadly CAM is defined . A National Health Interview survey 2012 indicates that commonly used CAM therapies includeDeep breathing exercises 11Yoga tai chi and qi gong 10Manipulative therapy 8Meditation 8Yoga 6 . 1Use of other CAM therapies and approaches remains variable and difficult to quantify homeopathy 2 . 2 naturopathy 0 . 4 and energy healing 0 . 5 . In addition 57 . 6 of adults used at least one dietary supplement in the past 30 days .Effectiveness and SafetyIn 1992 the Office of Alternative Medicine within the National Institutes of Health NIH was formed to research the effectiveness and safety of alternative therapies . In 1998 this office became the National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine and in 2015 it was renamed the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health.The effectiveness of alternative therapies is an important consideration .Many CAM therapies have been studied and found to be ineffective or inconsistent . Some therapies have been shown to be effective for specific conditions . However these therapies are often also used to treat other conditions and symptoms even though scientific evidence is lacking for these uses as is sometimes the case in conventional medicine . Some CAM therapies have not been tested in well designed studies . However a lack of evidence from well designed studies is not proof that a therapy is ineffective .Many CAM therapies are said to have been practiced for hundreds or thousands of years . They includeacupuncturemeditationyogatherapeutic dietsmassageand botanical medicinedietary supplements. Having a long history of use is sometimes used as support that CAM therapies are effective . However there are limitations with this argumentBeing used for a long time is not scientifically equivalent to proven effect . Some therapies subsequently found to be ineffective or harmful were previously used for many years .The length of time a therapy has been in use can be difficult to establish .How a therapy was used in the past may differ from how it is used now as may the therapy itself .Thus scientific evidence using well designed studies is still preferred to determine whether a therapy is effective .However well designed studies of CAM therapies can be difficult to do . Barriers to doing research on CAM therapies include the followingLack of support and financial resources for CAM among sources that fund medical researchersLimited training and skill to perform scientific research among advocates of CAMLooser regulations requiring proof that CAM products or therapies are effective before they are made publicly available compared with regulations governing conventional medicine treatmentsGenerally lower financial returns for companies studying CAM than for those doing medication or device researchApplying conventional research methods to study CAM may be difficult for many additional reasons includingThe best conventional research design compares active treatment such as a medication or treatment with aplaceboan intervention that is made to resemble a medication or treatment but does not include an active medication or treatment or no new intervention a control group . For some CAM therapies such ashomeopathyand botanical medicine designing a placebo is relatively easy . However designing a placebo for physical treatments such as acupuncture or manual manipulation treatment is more difficult . Designing a placebo for meditation or whole system of healthy eating is even more of a challenge .Separating the effects of a CAM therapy s active component from those of placebo is difficult . For example practitioners of CAM therapies typically interact with people in a positive and supportive way that is known to make people feel better regardless of what other therapies are used . This aspect of CAM can be viewed as a placebo effect .Conventional research design uses the method of double blinding . Double blinding involves preventing research subjects and practitioners from knowing which people were given which treatment . People and practitioners typically expect the active treatment to do better than the placebo . Double blinding reduces the likelihood that this expectation will bias the results in favor of the treatment . However blinding practitioners may be difficult . For example a practitioner ofReikiwould know whether a real energy treatment is being given . In such cases the effectiveness of the treatment should be evaluated by a study investigator who does not know which treatment was used .CAM therapies and diagnoses may not be standardized . For example different practitioners use different systems of acupuncture and the contents and effects of natural product preparations vary widely .However despite these challenges many well designed studies of CAM therapies such asacupunctureandhomeopathyhave been done . For example one acupuncture study used a well designed placebo making double blinding possible by placing an opaque sheath against the person s skin at an acupuncture point . Some sheaths contained a needle that penetrated the skin active treatment and some did not placebo . For CAM therapies to be considered effective there should be evidence that they are more effective when compared to a placebo or a control .Lack of funding for well designed CAM studies is often mentioned as a reason that these studies are not done . However CAM products are a multi billion dollar business suggesting that lack of profitability should not be a reason companies do not study these products . However profitability overall is much larger for conventional medication development than for CAM products .Safety is another important consideration .Did You Know . . .Perhaps the greatest risk of complementary and alternative medicine CAM occurs when a person with a life threatening disorder is treated with an unproven CAM therapyinstead ofa proven conventional medicine therapy .The greatest health risk of CAM is likelyUse of an unproven therapyinstead ofa proven conventional therapy to treat a life threatening disorderdietary supplementswhich are used in many alternative therapies are not regulated as drugs by the U . S . Food and Drug Administration FDA their safety is less certain than carefully regulated drugs seeSafety and Effectiveness.Some general risks include the followingSome substances in CAM preparations may interact dangerously with each other or with prescription medications .Highly purified dietary supplements are readily available in the United States and many countries in Europe but products produced in other countries may contain dangerous contaminants toxic ingredients or other drugs .Harm can be done by CAM therapies that involve manipulation of the body or other nonchemical interventions for example manipulation that injures vulnerable parts of the body .In many cases of CAM harm has neither been established nor excluded but in some cases potential harm has been shown . Sometimes the potential for harm is under reported and under appreciated by people who advocate use of the alternative products or therapies .More InformationThe following English language resource may be useful . Please note that THE MANUAL is not responsible for the content of this resource .