Aging is a gradual continuous process of natural change that begins in early adulthood . During early middle age many bodily functions begin to gradually decline .People do not become older or elderly at any specific age . Traditionally age 65 has been designated as the beginning of older age . But the reason was based in history not biology . Many years ago age 65 was chosen as the age for retirement in Germany the first nation to establish a retirement program . In 1965 in the United States age 65 was designated as the eligibility age for Medicare insurance . This age is close to the actual retirement age of most people in economically advanced societies .When a person becomes an older adult can be answered in different waysChronologic ageis based solely on the passage of time . It is a person s age in years . Chronologic age has limited significance in terms of health . Nonetheless the likelihood of developing a health problem increases as people age and it is health problems rather than normal aging that are the primary cause of functional loss during older age . Because chronologic age helps predict many health problems it has some legal and financial uses .Biologic agerefers to changes in the body that commonly occur as people age . Because these changes affect some people sooner than others some people are biologically older at 65 and others not until a decade or more later . However most noticeable differences in apparent age among people of similar chronologic age are caused by lifestyle habit and subtle effects of disease rather than by differences in actual aging .Psychologic ageis based on how people act and feel . For example an 80 year old who works plans looks forward to future events and participates in many activities is considered psychologically younger .Most healthy and active people do not need the expertise of a geriatrician a doctor who specializes in the care of older adults until they are 70 75 or even 80 years old . However some people need to see a geriatrician at a younger chronologic age because of their medical conditions .People often wonder whether what they are experiencing as they age is normal or abnormal . Although people age somewhat differently some changes result from internal processes that is from aging itself . Thus such changes although undesired are considered normal and are sometimes called pure aging . These changes occur in everyone who lives long enough and that universality is part of the definition of pure aging . The changes are to be expected and are generally unavoidable . For example as people age the lens of the eye thickens stiffens and becomes less able to focus on close objects such as reading materials a disorder calledpresbyopia. This change occurs in virtually all older adults . Thus presbyopia is considered normal aging . Other terms used to describe these changes are usual aging and senescence .Did You Know . . .Average life expectancy has increased a lot but maximum life span has increased little if at all .Exactly what constitutes normal aging is not always clear . Changes that occur with normal aging make people more likely to develop certain disorders . However people can sometimes take actions to compensate for these changes . For example older adults are more likely to lose teeth . But seeing a dentist regularly eating fewer sweets and brushing and flossing regularly may reduce the chances of tooth loss . Thus tooth loss although common with aging is an avoidable part of aging .Also functional decline that is part of aging sometimes seems similar to functional decline that is part of a disorder . For example with advanced age a mild decline in mental function is nearly universal and is considered normal aging . This decline includes increased difficulty learning new things such as languages decreased attention span and increased forgetfulness . In contrast the decline that occurs indementiais much more severe . For example people who are aging normally may misplace things or forget details but people who have dementia forget entire events . People with dementia also have difficulty doing normal daily tasks such as driving cooking and handling finances and understanding the environment including knowing what year it is and where they are . Thus dementia is considered a disorder even though it is common later in life . Certain kinds of dementia such asAlzheimer diseasediffer from normal aging in other ways as well . For example brain tissue obtained during autopsy in people with certain kinds of dementia looks different from that in older adults without the disease . So the distinction between normal aging and dementia is often clear .Sometimes the distinction between functional decline that is part of aging and functional decline that is part of a disorder seems arbitrary . For example as people age blood sugar levels increase more after eating carbohydrates than they do in younger people . This increase is considered normal aging . However if the increase exceeds a certain leveldiabetesa disorder is diagnosed . In this case the difference is one of degree only .Healthy aging refers to postponement of or reduction in the undesired effects of aging . The goals of healthy aging are maintaining physical and mental health avoiding disorders and remaining active and independent . For most people maintaining general good health requires more effort as they age . Developing certain healthy habits can help such asFollowing a nutritious dietAvoiding cigarette smoking and excessive alcohol useExercising regularlyStaying mentally activeThe sooner a person develops these habits the better . However it is never too late to begin . In this way people can have some control over what happens to them as they age .Some evidence suggests that in the United States healthy aging is on the riseA decrease in the percentage of people aged 75 to 84 who report impairmentsA decrease in the percentage of people over age 65 with debilitating disordersAn increase in the oldest old people age 85 and older including those who have reached 100 centenariansStudying AgingGerontologyis the study of the aging process including physical mental and social changes . The information is used to develop strategies and programs for improving the lives of older adults . Some gerontologists have a medical degree and are alsogeriatricians.Geriatricsis the branch of medicine that specializes in the care of older adults which often involves managing many disorders and problems at the same time . Geriatricians have studied the aging process so that they can better distinguish which changes result from aging itself and which indicate a disorder .Although the older population of the United States is increasing the number of geriatricians per 10 000 people over age 65 has decreased steadily since 2000 .Life ExpectancyThe average life expectancy of Americans has been increasing dramatically over the past century . A male child born in 1900 could expect to live only 46 years and a female child 48 years . In 2021 the average life expectancy in the United States for the total population was 76 years . Although much of this gain can be attributed to the significant decrease in childhood mortality life expectancy at every age beyond 40 has also increased dramatically . For example a 65 year old man can now expect to live to about age 83 and a 65 year old woman to about age 86 . Overall women live about 4 to 5 years longer than men . This difference in life expectancy between men and women has changed little despite late 20th century and early 21st century changes in women s lifestyle including smoking more and experiencing more stress .Despite the increase in average life expectancy the maximum life span the oldest age to which people can live has changed little since records have been kept . Despite the best genetic makeup and healthiest lifestyle the chance of living to be 120 is tiny . Madame Jeanne Calment had the longest documented lifespan 122 years 1875 to 1997 .Several factors influence life expectancyHeredityHeredity influences whether a person will develop a disorder . For example a person who inherits genes that increase the risk of developing high cholesterol levels is likely to have a shorter life . A person who inherits genes that protect againstcoronary artery diseaseand cancer is likely to have a longer life . There is good evidence that living to a very old age to 100 or older runs in families .LifestyleAvoiding smokingnot abusing illicit drugs and alcoholmaintaining a healthy weight and dietexercisingand getting recommended vaccinations and screening examinations help people function well and avoid disorders .Exposure to toxins in the environmentSuch exposure can shorten life expectancy even among people with the best genetic makeup .Health carePreventing disorders or treating disorders after they are contracted especially when the disorder can be cured as with infections and sometimes cancer helps increase life expectancy .More InformationThe following English language resources may be useful . Please note that THE MANUAL is not responsible for the content of these resources .This resource focuses on issues pertaining to people 50 years of age and older for example health care caregiving and access to affordable quality long term care .This resource provides information about ongoing biomedical research dedicated to the support and advancement of healthy aging .This resource helps older adults find local benefits they may be eligible for .This resource from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention provides health statistics for Americans age 65 and older .andThese resources provide information for older adults regarding topics ranging from health care and nutrition to caregiving to research .andThese resources provide information about independent living for older adults and people of all ages with disabilities .