Nutrition is the process of consuming absorbing and using nutrients needed by the body for growth development and maintenance of life .To receive adequate appropriate nutrition people need to consume a healthy diet which consists of a variety of nutrients the substances in foods that nourish the body . A healthy diet enables people to maintain a desirable body weight and composition the percentage of fat and muscle in the body to do their daily physical and mental activities and to minimize risk of disease and disability .The United States Department of Agriculture USDAstate that A healthy dietary pattern consists of nutrient dense forms of foods and beverages across all food groups in recommended amounts and within calorie limits . According to these guidelines the core elements that make up a healthy dietary pattern includeVegetables of all types dark green red and orange beans peas and lentils starchy and other vegetablesFruits especially whole fruitGrains at least half of which are whole grainDairy including fat free or low fat milk yogurt and cheese and or lactose free versions and fortified soy beverages and yogurt as alternativesProtein foods including lean meats poultry and eggs seafood beans peas and lentils and nuts seeds and soy productsOils including vegetable oils and oils in food such as seafood and nutsIf people consume too much foodobesitymay result . If they consume large amounts of certain nutrients usuallyvitaminsormineralsharmful effects toxicity may occur . If people do not consume enough nutrientsundernutritionmay develop resulting in a nutritional deficiency disorder .Evaluation of Nutritional StatusTo determine whether people are consuming a proper amount of nutrients doctors ask them about their eating habits and diet and do a physical examination to assess the composition and functioning of the body .Height and weightare measured andbody mass index BMIis calculated . BMI is calculated by dividing weight in kilograms by the square of the height in meters . A BMI between 18 . 5 and 24 . 9 is usually considered normal or healthy for men and women . In the United States and other countries with low rates of food insecurity many people have a BMI that is higher than 24 . Maintaining an appropriate weight is important for physical and psychologic health . A standardized height weight table can be used as a guide but BMI is more reliable .BMI however does not account for differences inbody composition. Waist circumference can be measured instead the fat in the midsection is sometimes a more accurate measure of excess weight or harmful fat that is deposited in the internal organs and that tends to predict risk of heart disease and metabolic disorders .Levels of many nutrientsBody composition usually refers to how much of the body is fat and how much is muscle typically expressed as the percentage of body fat . Body composition is sometimes estimated byMeasuring skinfold thicknessDoing bioelectrical impedance analysisMore accurate ways to determine this percentage include weighing people under water hydrostatic weighing and doing a dual energy x ray absorptiometry DXA scan computerized tomography CT scan and magnetic resonance imaging MRI . However these more accurate methods are not easy to use can be expensive expose people to unnecessary radiation CT scans and are not always readily available . They are used mainly in research .Skinfold thicknessBody composition can be estimated by measuring the amount of fat under the skin skinfold thickness . A fold of skin on the back of the left upper arm triceps skinfold is pulled away from the arm and measured with a caliper . A skinfold measurement of about 1 2 inch in men and about 1 inch in women is considered normal . This measurement plus the circumference of the left upper arm can be used to estimate the amount of skeletal muscle in the body lean body mass .Bioelectric impedance analysisThis test measures the resistance of body tissues to the flow of an undetectable low voltage electrical current . Typically people stand barefoot on metal footplates and the electrical current which people cannot feel is sent up one foot and down the other . Body fat and bone resist the flow much more than muscle tissue does . By measuring the resistance to the current doctors can estimate the percentage of body fat . This test takes only about 1 minute .Hydrostatic weighingPeople are weighed underwater in a small pool and that weight is compared to their weight on dry land . Bone and muscle are denser than water so people with a high percentage of lean tissue weigh more in water and people with a high percentage of fat weigh less . Although this method is considered the most accurate it requires special equipment that is not readily available as well as considerable time and expertise to do .Dual energy x ray absorptiometry DXAThis imaging procedure accurately determines the amount and distribution of body fat . DXA uses a very low dose of radiation and is safe . However it is too expensive to use routinely .CT scan and MRI although not routinely available for health enhancement alone provide the most detailed and accurate body composition analysis because they can determine more precisely how much fat is in the tissues including inside muscles and organs and can differentiate the more harmful abdominal and internal organ visceral fat from the less harmful fat under the skin subcutaneous fat .Components of the DietGenerally nutrients are divided into two classesMacronutrientsMacronutrients are required daily in large quantities . They includeproteinsfatscarbohydratessome minerals and water .MicronutrientsMicronutrients are required daily in small quantities in milligrams one thousandth of a gram to micrograms one millionth of a gram . They include vitamins and certain minerals that enable the body to use macronutrients . These minerals are called trace minerals because the body needs only very small amounts .Foods consumed in the daily diet contain as many as 100 000 substances . But only 300 are classified as nutrients and only 45 are classified as essential nutrientsVitaminsMineralsSome amino acids components of proteinSome fatty acids components of fatsEssential nutrients cannot be synthesized by the body and must be consumed in the diet .Nutrients that the body can make from other compounds are called nonessential . However under certain conditions such as illness or stress the body may not make enough of these nonessential nutrients . Then they need to be consumed in the diet making themconditionally essential nutrients.Foods contain many other useful components includingfibersuch as cellulose pectins and gums .Foods also containadditivessuch as preservatives emulsifiers antioxidants and stabilizers which improve the production processing storage and packaging of foods .Spotlight on Aging NutritionA diet is whatever a person eats regardless of the goal . The best diet for older people has not been determined . However people may benefit from changing some aspects of their diet as they age based on the way the body changes as it ages . No changes are required for some nutrients such as carbohydrates and fats .CaloriesAs people age they tend to be less active and thus use less energy making it easier to gain weight . If they try to consume fewer calories to avoid weight gain they may not get all the nutrients needed particularly vitamins and minerals . If older people stay physically active their need for calories may not change .ProteinAs people age they tend to lose muscle . If older people do not consume enough protein they may lose even more muscle . For older people who have problems eating for example because of difficulty swallowing or dental disorders protein can be consumed in foods that are easier to chew than meat such as fish dairy products eggs peanut butter beans and soy products .FiberVitaminsandmineralsWaterAs people age they are more likely to become dehydrated because their ability to sense thirst decreases . Thus older people need to make a conscious effort to drink enough fluids rather than wait until they feel thirsty . However older people do not need to drink more water in general than younger people .Older people are more likely to have disorders or take drugs that can change the body s nutritional needs or the body s ability to meet those needs . Disorders and drugs can decrease appetite or interfere with the absorption of nutrients . When older people see their doctor they should ask their doctor whether the disorders they have or the drugs they take affect nutrition in any way .More InformationThe following English language resources may be useful . Please note that THE MANUAL is not responsible for the content of these resources .U . S . Department of Agriculture USDA and U . S . Department of Health and Human Services nutrition recommendations by life stage from birth through older adulthoodUSDA s food guidance system promoting a healthy eating routine with a variety of fruits vegetables grains protein foods and dairy and fortified soy alternatives