Traditional medical care focuses on improving health by identifying and treating health problems that have already produced symptoms or complications . In contrast preventive medical care focuses on preventing health problems from occurring . Preventive care also focuses on diagnosing problems before symptoms or complications develop when the chances of recovery are greatest . When done well prevention improves overall health and reduces health care costs .The general goal of prevention is to reduce a person s likelihood of becoming ill or disabled or of dying prematurely . Preventive medical care is not a case of one size fits all . Specific goals are developed by and for each person . Specific goals depend heavily on a person s risk profile that is the person s risk of developing a disease based on such factors as age sex genetic background lifestyle and physical and social environment . Factors that increase risk are called risk factors .Some risk factors are beyond a person s control such as age sex and family history . Other risk factors such as a person s lifestyle and physical and social environment can be altered potentially decreasing risk of developing disorders . In addition risk can be reduced through good medical care .Most of the medical care thatinfantsolder childrenandadolescentsreceive specifically well child care is aimed at recognizing risk factors and preventing problems . For example examination focuses on detecting early signs of developing problems . Routine health care also includes a review of the child s immunization record and administration of recommendedvaccines. Health care professionals also counsel parents about preventing accidents and injuries in children and adolescents .More InformationThe following English language resource may be useful . Please note that THE MANUAL is not responsible for the content of this resource .The U . S . Preventive Services Task Force publishes recommendations about the effectiveness of various screening tests and preventive strategies for specific conditions . These recommendations are based on a systematic review of the evidence .