During adolescence usually considered age 10 to the late teens boys and girls reach adult height and weight and undergo sexual maturationpuberty. The timing and speed with which these changes occur vary and are affected by both heredity and environment .See alsoHealth Supervision of the Well Child.Physical Growth in AdolescentsFor height and weight charts for children 2 years of age and older seefrom the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention CDC .There is a growth spurt during adolescence . The growth spurt in boys occurs during mid adolescence between the ages of about 12 years and 16 years most commonly about age and usually begins a year after the testes start enlarging . Boys grow about 4 inches about 10 centimeters during their year of maximum growth . The growth spurt in girls occurs in early adolescence between the ages of about years and years most commonly about age . Girls grow about inches about 9 centimeters during their year of maximum growth . In general boys weigh more and are taller than girls .If the timing of growth is not typical particularly in a boy whose physical development is delayed seeDelayed Pubertyor a girl whose development occurs early seeEarly Pubertyemotional stress is possible . Most children who grow slowly eventually attain normal height seeConstitutional Delay of Puberty. However adolescents whose growth is delayed or abnormal seeGrowth Hormone Deficiency in Childrenshould be evaluated by doctors to rule out diseases and other physical causes and be given reassurance .Sexual Maturation in AdolescentsSexual maturation or puberty begins at different ages depending on genetic and environmental factors . Sexual maturity begins earlier today than a century ago probably because of improvements in nutrition general health and living conditions . For example the average age that girls begin menstruating has decreased by about 3 years over the past 100 years . However whenever sexual maturation begins it typically occurs in the same order .In boyssexual changes begin with enlargement of the scrotum and testes typically followed by lengthening of the penis seePuberty in Boys. Next pubic hair appears . Armpit and facial hair appears about 2 years after pubic hair . The growth spurt usually begins a year after the testes start enlarging . Boys in the United States typically have their first ejaculation between years and 14 years of age about 1 year after penis growth accelerates . Young adolescent boys often have slight enlargement of the breastsgynecomastiathat usually resolves within several years .In girlsbreast budding is the first sign of sexual maturation followed closely by the start of the growth spurt seePuberty in Girls. Shortly after that pubic and armpit hair appears . Menstruation typically begins about 2 years after breast development starts and when growth in height slows after reaching its peak velocity . In the United States most girls start their period at 12 or 13 years of age but there is a wide range .In both boys and girls pubic and or axillary hair may appear first . This appearance may be a normal variation but should be discussed with a doctor .Milestones in Sexual DevelopmentIf sexual maturation begins too early seeEarly Pubertyor is very delayed seeDelayed Pubertydoctors typically evaluate children for possible hormonal disorders .More InformationThe following English language resource may be useful . Please note that THE MANUAL is not responsible for the content of this resource .Centers for Disease Control and Prevention CDCfrom the CDC for children and adolescents age 2 years and older in the United States