Physical growth refers to an increase in body size length or height and weight and in the size of organs . From birth to about age 1 or 2 years children grow rapidly . After this rapid infant and early toddler growth growth slows until theadolescent growth spurt. As growth slows children need fewer calories and parents may notice a decrease in appetite . Two year old children can have very erratic eating habits that sometimes make parents anxious . Some children may seem to eat virtually nothing yet continue to grow and thrive . Actually they usually eat little one day and then make up for it by eating more the next day .During the preschool and school years growth in height and weight is steady . Children tend to grow a similar amount each year until the next major growth spurt occurs in early adolescence .Different organs grow at different rates . For example the reproductive system has a brief growth spurt just after birth then changes very little until just beforesexual maturationpuberty . In contrast the brain grows almost exclusively during the early years of life . The kidneys function at the adult level by the end of the first year .Children who are beginning to walk have an endearing physique with the belly sticking forward and the back curved . They may also appear to be quite bow legged . By 3 years of age muscle tone increases and the proportion of body fat decreases so the body begins to look leaner and more muscular . Most children are physically able to control their bowels and bladder at this time .Doctors report how children are growing in relation to other children their age and monitor the children s weight gain compared to their height . From birth until 2 years of age doctors record all growth parameters in a chart by using standardfrom the World Health Organization WHO . After age 2 doctors record growth parameters by usingfrom the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention CDC .See alsoHealth Supervision of the Well ChildandFailure to Thrive.Length and HeightLength is measured in infants . Height is measured in children who can stand . Infants are placed on their back on a suitable device such as a measuring table called a supine stadiometer and children who can stand are measured using a vertical or standing stadiometer .In general length in full term infants increases about 30 by age 5 months and more than 50 by age 12 months . Infants typically grow about 10 inches 25 centimeters during the first year and height at 5 years is about double the birth length . Most boys reach half their adult height by about age 2 years . Most girls reach half their adult height at about age 19 months .See alsofrom the WHO andfrom the CDC .WeightFull term newborns typically lose 5 to 8 of their birth weight during the first few days of life . They regain this weight by the end of the first 2 weeks . After this period of time newborns typically gain about 1 ounce per day during the first 2 months and 1 pound per month after that . This weight gain typically results in a doubling of birth weight by age 5 months and a tripling by 1 year .Since the 1980s more children in the United States have developedobesityexcess body weight and the number of children and adolescents with obesity remains high today . Some children become obese at an early age . The body mass index BMI is used to define overweight and obesity . The CDC has releasedfor boys and girls who have a very high BMI .See alsofrom the WHO andfrom the CDC .Head CircumferenceHead circumference is measurement around the largest area of a child s head . Doctors place the tape measure above the eyebrows and ears and around the back of the head . This measurement is important because the size of the head reflects the size of the brain and this measurement lets doctors know whether the child s brain is growing at a normal rate . Head circumference is routinely measured until children are 3 years old .At birth the brain is 25 of its future adult size and head circumference is about 14 inches about 35 centimeters . By 1 year of age the brain is 75 of its adult size . By 3 years of age the brain is 80 of its adult size . By 7 years of age the brain is 90 of its adult size .TeethThe timing of tooth eruption varies mainly for hereditary reasons . However tooth eruption may also be delayed by disorders such asricketshypopituitarismhypothyroidismorDown syndrome.Lower front teeth usually begin to appear by the age of 5 to 9 months . Upper front teeth usually begin to appear by 8 to 12 months . On average infants have 6 teeth by age 12 months 12 teeth by 18 months 16 teeth by 2 years and all 20 of their baby deciduous teeth by years . Baby teeth are replaced by permanent adult teeth between the ages of 5 years and 13 years . Permanent teeth tend to appear earlier in girls .The symptoms caused by tooth eruption such as drooling and fussiness are calledteething.More InformationThe following English language resources may be useful . Please note that THE MANUAL is not responsible for the content of these resources .World Health Organization WHOfrom the WHO for infants and children ages 0 to 2 years of ageCenters for Disease Control and Prevention CDCfrom the CDC for children and adolescents age 2 years and older in the United StatesCDCfor boys and girls who have a very high BMI