Healthy infants should be seen by their doctor often during the first year of life . Preventive health care visits also called well child visits typically take place within a few days after birth or by 2 weeks of age and at 1 2 4 6 and 9 months of age . During these visits the doctor uses age specific guidelines to monitor theinfant s growth and developmentand asks the parents questions about various developmental milestones see tableDevelopmental Milestones From Birth to Age 12 Months. Tests are sometimes done and during many visits the doctor vaccinates the infant against various illnesses seeChildhood Vaccination Schedule.Health care visits also allow the doctor to educate the parents about eating sleeping behavior child safety nutrition exercise and good health habits . In addition the doctor advises the parents what developmental changes to expect in their infant by the next visit .The infant slength and heightweightandhead circumferenceare measured at every visit . The doctor examines the infant for various abnormalities including signs of hereditary disorders orbirth defects.The eyes are examined and vision is tested . Infants who were born very prematurely before the completion of 32 weeks of development in the uterus usually need more frequent eye examinations by an eye specialist to look forretinopathy of prematuritywhich is an eye disease that occurs when infants are born before the blood vessels in their eyes are fully developed and may result in blindness and for the development ofrefractive errorswhich result in blurring of vision . These disorders are more common among infants who were born very prematurely .The doctor checks the infant s hips for signs that the hip joints are loose or dislocateddevelopmental dysplasia of the hip. The doctorchecks the infant s teethif they are present for cavities and the mouth forthrushwhich is a common yeast infection among infants .The doctor also examines the heart lungs abdomen arms and legs and genitals .Screening tests are done to assess whether infants are at risk of certain disorders .Blood tests are done to detectanemiasickle cell diseaseandexposure to lead.Hearing tests are done shortly after birth to determine whether an infant has a hearing disorder or hearing loss seeNewborn Screening Testsand are repeated later if new concerns about the infant s hearing develop see alsoHearing Impairment in Children.Infants are screened for tuberculosis TB risk factors with a questionnaire at all well child visits usually beginning in infancy . Risk factors include exposure to TB being born in or having traveled to areas of the world where TB is common countries other than the United States Canada Australia and New Zealand and Western and North European countries having a family member with TB and having parents or close contacts who are recent immigrants from an area where TB is common or who have recently been in jail . Those with risk factors usually havetuberculosis screening testsdone .At these visits the doctor gives parents age appropriate safety guidelines .The following safety guidelines apply to infants from birth to age 12 monthsUse a rear facing car seat and place it in the back seat of the vehicle .Set the hot water heater to 120 F or less .Prevent falls from changing tables and around stairs .Place infants on their back to sleep on a firm flat mattress for every sleep do not share a bed and do not place pillows bumper pads nonfitted sheets stuffed animals or other toys quilts comforters or weighted or loose blankets in the crib . See also sidebarSafe to Sleep Reducing the Risk of SIDS.Do not give infants foods and objects that can cause choking or be inhaled into the lungs .Do not use baby walkers .Place safety latches on cabinets and cover electrical outlets .Remain alert when watching infants in the bathtub or near a pool or any body of water and when they are learning to walk .For infants recommendations for nutrition are based on age . The doctor can help parents weigh the benefits ofbreastfeedingversusformula feedingand give guidance regardingsolid foods.Parents should provide infants with a safe environment they can roam in and explore . Outdoor play should be encouraged from infancy .Screen time for example television video games cell phones and other handheld devices and noneducational computer time may result in inactivity and obesity . Limits on the time a child spends using devices with screens should start at birth and be maintained throughout adolescence .