Annual health care visits also called well child visits allow doctors and other health care professionals to monitorphysical growthandsexual maturationpuberty and provide advice and counseling . The yearly health care visits for adolescents begin at age 11 and continue until about age 21 .Routine health care also includes a review of the immunization record and administration ofrecommended vaccines.Doctors also may encourage activities such as participation in sports the arts and community service . Most doctors interview and examine adolescents privately although parents may be invited to participate and share concerns and receive their own counseling and guidance at the beginning or end of the visit .See alsoAdolescent DevelopmentandProblems in Adolescents.At each visit screenings may be done andvaccinationsare given depending on the schedule .The adolescent s height weight and blood pressure are measured at every yearly health care visit . The doctor then does a complete physical examination .Once children become adolescents certain areas of the body require a more detailed examination . For example examination of the skin for acne evaluation of the degree of puberty andexamination of the back for scoliosisare particularly important in adolescence .Apelvic examinationis not usually necessary in adolescent girls but may be appropriate if they have certain problems such as vaginal bleeding or discharge or if sexual abuse is suspected . The pelvic examination may include an examination of the external genitals called the vulva or labia or if necessary an internal examination .The doctor may educate girls about breast self awareness to become familiar with the usual appearance and feel of their breasts . If girls notice changes in how their breasts appear or feel for example masses thickening or enlargement they should see a doctor . Girls are not advised to routinely do abreast self examinationsuch as every week or month because this has not been shown to be an effective method ofscreening for breast cancer.Older adolescent boys are examined for testicular masses and boys of all ages areexamined for inguinal hernias. The doctor may educate adolescent boys abouttesticular self examinationto identify masses .Ablood cholesterol level testshould be done for all children between 9 and 11 years of age and again between 17 and 21 years of age . More frequent testing may be recommended for young children and adolescents with obesity or those with a family history of high cholesterol or heart disease .Adolescents are screened for tuberculosis TB risk factors with a questionnaire at all well child visits . Risk factors include exposure to TB being born in or having traveled to areas of the world where TB is common countries other than the United States Canada Australia and New Zealand and Western and North European countries having a family member who has TB and having parents or close contacts who are recent immigrants from an area where TB is common or who have recently been in jail . Those with risk factors then usually havetuberculosis screening testsdone .Once adolescents are sexually active doctors may screen them every year for commonsexually transmitted infections STIssuch asgonorrheaandchlamydia. Screening is done using samples of urine or samples taken from the rectum urethra cervix or throat .Doctors may screen an adolescent for human immunodeficiency virus HIV infection at least once between the ages of 15 years and 18 years . HIV screening should be done every year for adolescents who are sexually active have another STI or use or have used injection drugs . Screening is done with a sample of blood .Doctors generally begin screening women forcervical cancerat age 21 years . Screening is done with samples of cells taken from the cervixPap test.All people should be routinely screened for hepatitis C virus HCV infection at least once between the ages of 18 and 79 . People at increased risk of HCV infection including those who have used or who currently use injection drugs should be tested for HCV infection and reassessed every year . Screening is done with a sample of blood .Most of a routine health care visit involves a psychosocial screening interview and counseling . The screening interview includes questions regarding the home environment academic achievement and goals activities and hobbiesengagement in risk taking behaviorsmental healthandemotional health. Counseling usually revolves around physical andpsychosocial developmenthealthy lifestyles and injury prevention .Injury prevention is discussed with adolescents . Counseling typically includes wide ranging topics such asThe importance of wearing seatbeltsThe dangers of drinking and driving and texting and drivingThe dangers of developinga drug or alcohol use disorderResponsible sexual behaviorInternet and app dangers and appropriate cautionsViolence preventionOverweight andobesityare common in the United States and are associated with heart disease and type 2 diabetes . To combat the risk of obesity parents should continue to provide adolescents with healthy food choices and limit their intake of unhealthy foods . Soda and excessive fruit juice drinking have been implicated as major contributors to obesity .Inactivity is directly linked to obesity . Screen time for example television video games cell phones and other handheld devices and noneducational computer time may result in inactivity and obesity . Limits on the time a child spends using devices with screens should start at birth and be maintained throughout adolescence . Participation in sports and physical activity should continue to be encouraged as adolescents age .