Although there are many different types of cancer which have different causes andrisk factorsdoctors estimate that about 40 of cancers are preventable . Also individual people have different risks for developing different cancers . Therefore no set of prevention strategies is effective in every person . However some general strategies do reduce the risk of cancer or cancer complications in many people . These general strategies fall into 3 categoriesPrimary prevention Steps people can take to lessen their chance of developing certain types of cancerSecondary prevention Directed at people who may already have some kind of cancer but have not developed symptomsTertiary prevention Measures aimed at slowing down the effects of a cancer to prevent complicationsScreeningis part of secondary prevention of certain cancers . It involves using information about a person particularly theirrisk factors for cancerand results of their physical examination to guide testing to look for unrecognized cancer . Early detection of cancerous or precancerous growths can save lives . So it is important that people get recommendedscreening tests for cancer. For examplecervical cancerare a way to screen forcervical cancersby detecting precancerous changes in cells of the cervix . Colonoscopy is one of thescreening tests for colorectal cancer. Removing precancerouscolon polypsfound during screening can decrease the chance of developing colorectal cancer .Lifestyle factors are the main reducible risk factors . The main factors include tobacco exposure alcohol consumption obesity and preventable or avoidable infectionshepatitis Bhepatitis Candhuman papilloma viruses. Reducing the risk of certain cancers may be possible through dietary and other lifestyle changes . How much risk can be reduced depends on the specific cancer .Dietary changesreduce the risk of some types of cancerDecreasing alcohol intake can reduce the risk of head and neck liver and esophageal cancer .Decreasing fat intake appears to reduce the risk of breast and colon cancers .Limiting the intake of processed meat and increasing the intake of whole grains and fruits and vegetables may decrease risk of some types of cancer .The way meat is cooked may also increase the risk of cancer . Grilling broiling or frying meats creates certain chemicals that have been linked to colon cancer . Using other cooking methods reduces the formation of these chemicals and may reduce the risk of colon cancer .Tobacco useis directly associated with one third of all cancers . Not smoking and avoiding exposure to tobacco smoke can greatly reduce the risk of lung kidney bladder head and neck and several other cancer types . People whoquit smokingcan also reduce their risk of cancer and the risks decrease over time . People who avoid the use of smokeless tobacco snuff or chew decrease their risk of cancer of the mouth and tongue . Current smokers or people who have smoked within the past 15 years are candidates for lung cancer screening .Being overweight or obeseincreases cancer risk especially breast cancer colon cancer endometrial cancer esophageal cancer kidney cancer and pancreatic cancer . People should try to maintain a healthy weight through both diet and exercise . Physical activity itself may reduce the risk of breast endometrial and prostate cancers .Carcinogensare substances that increase the risk of cancer . Some carcinogens such as asbestos benzene and diesel engine exhaust may be present in the workplace and workers in industries that use known carcinogens should take appropriate precautions to avoid or minimize exposure . Other carcinogens occur in the home or the environment . For example radioactive elements that naturally occur in the earth decay into radioactive radon gas which can collect inside the homes of people living in certain areas . Exposure to radon increases the risk of lung cancer especially in people who smoke .Avoiding sun exposureespecially during the middle of the day can reduce the risk ofskin cancers. Covering exposed skin and using sunscreens with a sun protection factor SPF of at least 30 that protect against both ultraviolet A and ultraviolet B light also help reduce the risk of skin cancer .Vaccines can prevent certain types of cancer that are caused by viruses . For example certain strains of sexually transmittedhuman papillomavirusHPV cause cervical cancer anal cancer and some forms of head and neck cancer .Vaccination against HPVbefore the first sexual encounter can largely prevent many cases of these cancers .As another example infection with hepatitis B virus increases the risk of liver cancer .Vaccination against hepatitis B viruscan help prevent liver cancer .For women withsymptoms of menopauseHormone Therapy for Menopause.More InformationThe following English language resource may be useful . Please note that THE MANUAL is not responsible for the content of this resource .Information to help people reduce the risk of cancer