Health issues at the destination are especially important to prevent and avoid in international settings . Certain infections are common when traveling to certain areas and many people are most concerned about infection when considering a trip overseas . However motor vehicle crashes and heart disease are the most common causes of death among international travelers . Heart disease is the most common cause of death among nontravelers as well suggesting that attention to health before leaving home is the best way to prevent illness while away .Injuries and Death While TravelingInjuries caused by motor vehicle crashes are the most frequent cause of death among younger and middle aged travelers . Another common cause of death while traveling is drowning . Common sense measures can be taken to prevent many such injuries . For example people uncomfortable with unfamiliar traffic patterns such as driving on the left side of the road in England versus the right side in the United States can take public transportation or hire drivers familiar with local roads and traffic laws . Travelers should avoid overcrowded taxis ferries or other transports and avoid nighttime driving and swimming in poorly lit areas . People should wear seat belts even as passengers and should use a helmet when bicycling . Travelers should avoid motorcycles and mopeds and avoid riding on bus roofs or in open truck beds . Also alcohol should never be consumed before driving or swimming even where laws do not formally prohibit such actions or where laws that do exist are not enforced . People should also avoid beaches with turbulent waves particularly when lifeguards are not present .Many cities are unsafe after dark and some are unsafe even during the day . A traveler should avoid walking alone on poorly lit or deserted streets in such cities especially in countries where the traveler is obviously a stranger .Fair skinned travelers are more vulnerable to sunburn at tropical latitudes and at high altitude . Use of high SPF sun protection factor of 30 or higher sunscreen is advisable . When both sunscreen and insect repellent are used sunscreen should be applied first then after at least fifteen minutes insect repellent .Did You Know . . .The most common cause of death among younger and middle aged travelers is injury .Traveler s DiarrheaTraveler s diarrheaturista is the most common health problem among international travelers . It is caused by bacteria or viruses that have contaminated food or water .The risk of traveler s diarrhea may be reduced by the following measuresDrinking and brushing teeth with bottled filtered boiled UV treated or chlorinated waterAvoiding iceEating freshly prepared foods only if they have been heated to steaming temperaturesEating only fruits and vegetables that people peel or shell themselvesAvoiding food from street vendorsWashing hands frequentlyAvoiding all foods likely to have been exposed to fliesTaking certain antibiotics can also prevent traveler s diarrhea . However such use has a risk of side effects and may increase the chances that bacteria will develop resistance to antibiotics . Thus doctors recommend preventive antibiotics only for people who have an immune deficiency disorder .For older adults and young children powdered rehydration mixes are available for travel . If these mixes are unavailable rehydration solutions can be made by adding 6 teaspoons of sugar and 1 half teaspoon of salt to 1 liter of water . However solutions should be prepared carefully because young children can become seriously ill or die if they drink much of a solution that has been incorrectly mixed for example if a rehydration mix has not been fully diluted .Malaria in Travelersmalariais common throughout the tropics . Malaria is prevented by avoiding mosquito bites and taking an antimalarial drug .Mosquito bites are preventedby the following measuresWearing long sleeved shirts and long trousers especially at dawn and dusk when mosquitoes are most activeSleeping under a mosquito netUsing insect repellants that contain diethyltoluamide DEET or picaridinInsect repellants can also help prevent other mosquito borne diseases such asdengueZikaandyellow fever.Even when people take measures to avoid mosquito bites it is still necessary to take adrug to prevent malaria.Pregnant women should consider delaying travel to areas where malaria is common because malaria is more likely to be serious and life threatening among pregnant women than among women who are not pregnant even when preventive drugs are used . Pregnant women who cannot postpone travel must weigh the risks of taking protective drugs the effects of which on pregnancy are not well known against the risks of traveling without protection .Although the new RTS S AS01 RTS S malaria vaccine is recommended for children living in regions with moderate to highPlasmodium falciparummalaria transmission this vaccine is not recommended for travelers to those regions .Sexually Transmitted InfectionsSexually transmitted infections includinghuman immunodeficiency virus HIV infectiongonorrheasyphilistrichomoniasisandhepatitis Bare more common in low and middle income countries . All can be prevented through abstinence or with correct consistent use of a latex condom seePrevention of Sexually Transmitted Infections. Because HIV and hepatitis B also are transmitted through blood and needles an international traveler should not accept a blood transfusion without assurance that the blood has been tested for infection . Also injections should be accepted only through one time only disposable needles .COVID 19COVID 19is an acute respiratory illness that can be severe and is caused by the coronavirus named SARS CoV2 . The COVID 19 pandemic necessitated limitation of travel to and from various countries . Entry requirements for example testing vaccination quarantine change frequently and travelers should check the websites of their nation s health agency for example in the United States theas well as those of the destination countries for current recommendations .DengueDengueis a mosquito borne viral infection that causes fever generalized body aches and if severe external and internal bleeding called dengue hemorrhagic fever . Dengue is common in the tropics and subtropics worldwide . It is most common in Southeast Asia but has become more common in Central and South America and other countries . It has occurred in the Caribbean including Puerto Rico and the U . S . Virgin Islands in Oceania and in the Indian subcontinent .A vaccine is available in Mexico Brazil Thailand and some other countries not in the United States but use is restricted to people who have previously had dengue .Mosquito bite preventionis important for people traveling to areas where dengue is common .Wear clothing that covers as much of the body as possibleUse insect repellants such as DEET diethyltoluamide or picaridinAvoid exposure to mosquitoes and ticks as much as possibleThese measures also offer protection from other insect transmitted diseases includingZikaandchikungunya. See.InfluenzaInfluenzaflu is a viral infection of the lungs and airways with one of the influenza viruses . It is common in international travelers . An annualinfluenza vaccinesis the best way to prevent influenza .SchistosomiasisSchistosomiasisis a common and potentially serious infection caused by a parasite that lives in freshwater in Africa Southeast Asia China and eastern South America . The risk of schistosomiasis can be reduced by avoiding freshwater activities in areas where schistosomiasis is common . Asymptomatic travelers with freshwater exposure in regions where schistosomiasis is common should be screened for the parasite after returning from such regions .Lice and ScabiesLiceandscabiesZika VirusZika virusinfection causes few or only mild symptoms in adults . However Zika infection during pregnancy can cause serious birth defects in the baby .Zika virus infection is spread by mosquitoes and also by sexual contact and transfusion of blood from an infected person . The disease has spread widely through South and Central America the Caribbean South Asia Southeast Asia and Pacific Islands . The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention CDC recently reported that all of the cases of Zika virus infection in the United States were in travelers returning from affected areas . There were no reports of Zika virus infection spread by local mosquitoes or through sexual contact . The CDC recommends that pregnant women consider postponing travel to areas where Zika virus infection is common seeand.More InformationThe following English language resource may be useful . Please note that THE MANUAL is not responsible for the content of this resource .Travelers Health