Most children sleep for a stretch of at least 5 hours by age 3 months but then have periods of night waking later in the first years of life often when they have an illness . As they get older the amount of rapid eye movement REM sleep increases and it is during this phase of thesleep cyclewhen dreams including nightmares occur .Families vary in their attitudes about children sleeping with parents and other sleep habits and different cultures vary in their attitudes about sleep habits too . Experts recommend that infants sleep in the same room as their parents but not in the same bed bed sharing . Bed sharing is thought to increase the risk ofsudden infant death syndromeSIDS . It is important that parents be open with each other about their preferences to avoid stress and avoid sending mixed messages to their children .For most children sleep problems are intermittent or temporary and often do not need treatment .See alsoOverview of Behavioral Problems in Children.NightmaresNightmares are frightening dreams that occur during REM sleep . A child having a nightmare can awaken fully and can vividly recall the details of the dream .Nightmares are not a cause for alarm unless they occur very often . They can occur more often during times of stress or after a child has seen a movie or television program containing frightening or aggressive content . If nightmares occur often parents can keep a diary to see whether they can identify the cause .Night Terrors and SleepwalkingNight terrors are episodes of incomplete awakening with extreme anxiety shortly after falling asleep . They occur in non REM sleep and are most common between the ages of 3 and 8 .During a night terror the child screams and appears frightened with a rapid heart rate sweating and rapid breathing . The child seems to be unaware of the parents presence may thrash around violently and does not respond to comforting and may talk but be unable to answer questions . Children should not be awakened because doing so makes them even more frightened . Usually the child returns to sleep after a few minutes . Unlike with nightmares the child cannot recall details of these episodes . Night terrors are dramatic because the child may scream and may be inconsolable during the episode .About one third of children with night terrors also sleepwalk rising from bed and walking around while apparently asleep also called somnambulism . About 15 of children between the ages of 5 and 12 have at least one episode of sleepwalking .Night terrors andsleepwalkingalmost always stop without treatment but occasional episodes may occur for years . Usually no treatment is needed but if these disorders continue into adolescence or adulthood and are severe treatment may be necessary . Children who need treatment for night terrors sometimes are helped by a sedative or certain antidepressants . However these medications are potent and can have side effects .Sleep sometimes is disrupted byrestless legs syndromeand a few children particularly those who thrash and snore may haveobstructive sleep apnea. A doctor may recommend iron supplements for children with restless legs syndrome even if they do not have iron deficiency anemia and may suggest anevaluation for sleep apneafor children who thrash and snore .Resistance to Going to BedChildren particularly between the ages of 1 and 2 often resist going to bed due toseparation anxietywhereas older children may be attempting to control more aspects of their environment . Young children often cry when left alone in their crib or they climb out and seek their parents .Resistance to going to bed is not helped if parents stay in the room at length to provide comfort or let children get out of bed . In fact these responses reinforce night waking in which children attempt to reproduce the conditions under which they fell asleep . To avoid these problems a parent may have to sit quietly in the hallway in sight of the child and make sure the child stays in bed . The child then establishes a routine of falling asleep alone and learns that getting out of bed is discouraged . The child also learns that the parents are available but will not provide more stories or play . Eventually the child settles down and goes to sleep . Providing the child with an attachment object like a teddy bear is often helpful . A small night light white noise or both also can be comforting . Some parents may find it helpful to set limits by giving the child a sleep pass that can be turned in for one time out of bed .Awakening During the NightEveryone awakens multiple times each night . Most people however usually fall back to sleep on their own . Children often have repeated episodes of night awakening after a move an illness or another stressful event . Sleeping problems may be worsened when children take long naps late in the afternoon or are overstimulated by playing before bedtime . Sleep sometimes is disrupted byrestless legs syndromeand a few children particularly those who thrash and snore may haveobstructive sleep apnea. A doctor may recommend iron supplements for children with restless legs syndrome even if they do not have iron deficiency anemia and may suggest anevaluation for sleep apneafor children who thrash and snore .Allowing the child to sleep with the parents because of the night awakening reinforces the behavior . Playing with or feeding the child during the night spanking and scolding also are counterproductive measures . Returning the child to bed with simple reassurance is usually more effective .A bedtime routine that includes reading a brief story offering a favorite doll or blanket and using a small night light for children who are older than 3 is often helpful . To decrease the likelihood of the child awakening it is important that the conditions and location under which the child awakens during the night are the same as those under which the child falls asleep . Thus although a child may be allowed to settle down in another location for example in another room with the parents the child should not be fully asleep when placed in the crib or bed .Parents and other caregivers should try to keep to a routine each night so that the child learns what is expected . If children are physically healthy allowing them to cry for a few minutes often allows them to settle down by themselves which will diminish the night awakenings .More InformationThe following English language resources may be useful . Please note that THE MANUAL is not responsible for the content of these resources .