The reddish substance in the flowers of St . John s wort contains numerous biologically active compounds including hypericin and hyperforin .See alsoOverview of Dietary Supplements.Claims for St . John s WortPeople take St . John s wort mostly to relieve symptoms of mild to moderatedepression.St . John s wort also has been used in the treatment of skin disorders includingpsoriasisandattention deficit hyperactivity disorderADHD in children .There are claims that St . John s wort can inhibit HIV the virus that causes AIDS . However it interferes with the effects of many of the medications that are more effective for HIV infection .Evidence for St . John s WortThe effectiveness of St . John s wort in treating ADHD or skin disorders has not been well studied and is considered unproved .Side Effects of St . John s WortSt . John s wort may increase sensitivity to sunlight . Other side effects include dry mouth constipation fatigue confusion and in people with bipolar disorder mania .During pregnancy St . John s wort increases muscle tone in the uterus and thus may increase the risk of a miscarriage .Drug Interactions with St . John s WortOne of the larger problems with St . John s wort is that it interacts negatively with a number of medications people take see table. These interactions may lead to toxic reactions or ineffectiveness of the medication .Recommendations for St . John s WortSt . John s wort may help ease symptoms of anxiety and mild to moderate depression . The American College of Physicians has stated that it may help symptoms of mild to moderate depression and may cause fewer side effects than conventional antidepressants .However St . John s wort interacts negatively with many medications people take so they should check with their doctor before taking it . Some countries have banned its use due to the numerous drug interactions .Pregnant women and people taking medications for HIV infection should not take St . John s wort .More InformationThe following English language resource may be useful . Please note that THE MANUAL is not responsible for the content of this resource .National Institutes of Health s National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health