Sunburn results from a brief acute overexposure to ultraviolet UV light .Overexposure to ultraviolet light causes sunburn .Sunburn causes painful reddened skin and sometimes blisters fever and chills .People can prevent sunburn by avoiding excessive sun exposure and by using sunscreens .Cold water compresses moisturizers and nonsteroidal anti inflammatory drugs ease pain until the sunburn heals .See alsoOverview of Sunlight and Skin Damage.The amount of sun exposure required to produce a sunburn varies with the amount of melanin in the skin usually visible as the amount of pigmentation the ability to produce more melanin and the amount of UV light in the sunlight on the day of overexposure .Sunburn results in painful reddened skin . Severe sunburn may cause swelling and blisters . Symptoms may begin as soon as 1 hour after exposure and typically reach their peak within 3 days usually between 12 hours and 24 hours . Some severely sunburned people develop a fever chills and weakness and on rare occasions even may go intoshockcharacterized by very low blood pressure fainting and profound weakness .Several days after a sunburn people with naturally fair skin may have peeling in the burned area usually accompanied by itching . These peeled areas are even more sensitive to sunburn for several weeks . Sunburned skin particularly peeled sunburned skin can become infected . Permanent brown spots called lentigines may develop . People who have had severe sunburns when young are at greater risk of skin cancer particularlymelanomain later years even if they have not been exposed to much sun since that time .Did You Know . . .People can get sunburned even on cloudy days because light clouds do not filter ultraviolet light .Even sunscreens that are water resistant need to be reapplied after swimming or sweating .Treatment of SunburnCold compresses and other soothing cooling skin applicationsNonsteroidal anti inflammatory drugs NSAIDsSometimes antibiotic burn creamsCold water compresses can soothe raw hot areas as can aloe vera and over the counter skin moisturizers products without anesthetics or perfumes which might irritate or sensitize the skin causing allergic reactions are recommended . NSAIDs taken by mouth help relieve pain and inflammation . Petrolatum based products such as petroleum jelly should be avoided in severe sunburns . Corticosteroids applied to the skin seem to be no more effective than cool compresses .Specific antibiotic burn creams are required only for severe blistering . Most sunburn blisters break on their own and do not need to be popped and drained . Sunburned skin rarely becomes infected but if an infection develops healing may be delayed . A doctor can determine the severity of an infection and prescribe antibiotics if necessary .Sunburned skin begins healing by itself within several days but complete healing may take weeks . After burned skin peels the newly exposed layers are thin and initially very sensitive to sunlight and must be protected for several weeks .Prevention of SunburnAvoid overexposure to sunWear protective clothingUse sunscreensThe best and most obvious way to prevent sun damage is to stay out of strong direct sunlight . Exposure to bright midday sun should be avoided even for people with dark skin . UV rays are not as strong before 10 AM and after 4 PM . If sun exposure is unavoidable the person should seek shade as soon as possible cover up in UV protective clothing and wear sunscreen a broad brimmed hat and UV protective sunglasses .Many materials are capable of filtering or blocking UV radiation but many are not . Clothing ordinary window glass smoke and smog filter out many of the damaging rays . However water is not a good filter . UVA and UVB light can penetrate a foot about 30 centimeters of clear water . Clouds and fog are also not good filters of UV light a person can get sunburned on a cloudy or foggy day .Snow water and sand reflect sunlight magnifying the amount of UV light that reaches the skin . People also burn more quickly at high altitudes where the thin air allows more burning UV light to reach the skin and low latitudes such as at the equator .Although sun exposure helps generatevitamin Dmany experts recommend maintaining adequatevitamin Dlevels by consuming supplements if needed rather than by intentional overexposure to sunlight 5 to 15 minutes of sun exposure on the arms a few days a week is probably enough to maintainvitamin Dlevels .The sun s damaging effects can be further minimized by wearing protective coverings such as hats shirts pants and sunglasses . Fabrics with a tight weave block the sun better than fabrics with a loose weave . Special clothing that provides high sun protection is commercially available . This type of clothing is labeled with ultraviolet protection factor UPF followed by a number that indicates the level of protection similar to sunscreen labeling . Broad brimmed hats help protect the face ears and neck but people still need to apply sunscreen to these areas . People should regularly wear UV protective wrap around sunglasses to help shield the eyes and eyelids .Before exposure to strong direct sunlight a person should apply a sunscreen which is a cream or lotion containing chemicals that protect the skin by filtering out UV light . Older sunscreens tended to filter only UVB light but most newer sunscreens effectively filter UVA light as well .Sunscreens are available in a wide variety of formulations including creams lotions gels foams sprays powders and sticks . Self tanning products do not provide significant protection from UV exposure .Chemical sunscreenscontain several substances that absorb UV radiation . Ingredients that absorb UVB radiation include cinnamates salicylates and para aminobenzoic acid PABA derivatives . Benzophenones block UVA and UVB light . Avobenzone and ecamsule filter in the UVA range and may be added to provide further UVA protection .Barrier or mineral sunscreensAll chemical sunscreen ingredients are thought to be absorbed by the body to some degree . Although most ingredients cause minimal side effects some do have potential risks and others are currently being studied . Traditional barrier sunscreens have relatively large mineral particles that are not absorbed by the body and are currently considered safe . Newer formulations of mineral sunscreens are made with extremely small particles nanoparticles that may be absorbed by the body . Although these nanoparticles are thought to be safe they are still being studied . People concerned about the effects of absorbed nanoparticles may prefer to use so called non nano mineral sunscreens .In the United States the Food and Drug Administration FDA rates sunscreens by their sun protection factor SPF number the higher the SPF number the greater the protection . Sunscreens rated between 2 and 14 provide minimal protection those rated between 15 and 29 provide good protection and those rated 30 and above provide maximum protection . Products that protect against sunburn and photoaging and also reduce the risk of skin cancer are labeled broad spectrum and have an SPF of 15 or higher . The SPF however only quantifies the protection against UVB light exposure . There is no scale for UVA light protection .For the best protectionpeople should use a broad spectrum water resistant sunscreen with an SPF rating of 30 or higher . One ounce about 30 milliliters should be used to cover the entire body surface of an average sized person .Sunscreens can fail if not enough of the product is applied if the product is applied too late sunscreens should optimally be applied 30 minutes before exposure to the sun and if the product is not reapplied after swimming or sweating even sunscreens labeled as water resistant or every 2 hours during sun exposure . Most people apply less than half the recommended amount of sunscreen .Did You Know . . .An ounce of sunscreen about 30 milliliters or enough to fill a standard shot glass is usually needed to cover the entire body . Most people apply less than half that .Sometimes sunscreens cause allergic reactions . People may react to the sunscreen after applying it or after applying it and then going in the sun called aphotoallergic reaction. Some dermatologists can do tests to diagnose suchphotosensitivity reactionsif the reason for the reaction is unclear .Are Tans HealthyIn a word no . Although a suntan is often considered an emblem of good health and of an active athletic life tanning for its own sake has no health benefit and is actually a health hazard . Any exposure to ultraviolet A or B UVA or UVB light can alter or damage the skin . Long term exposure to natural sunlight causes skin damage and increases the risk of skin cancer . Exposure to the artificial sunlight used in tanning salons is harmful as well . The UVA lights used in these establishments cause the same long term effects as exposure to UVB light such as wrinkling and mottled pigmentation photoaging and skin cancer . Quite simply there is no safe tan .Self tanning or sunless lotions do not really tan the skin but rather stain it . They therefore provide a safe way to achieve a tanned look without risking dangerous exposure to ultraviolet rays . However because they do not increase melanin production self tanning lotions do not offer protection from the sun . Therefore sunscreens should still be used during exposure to sunlight . Results with the use of self tanning lotions may vary depending on a person s skin type the formulation used and the manner in which the lotion is applied .Polypodium leucotomosa natural tropical fern extract and nicotinamide a form of vitamin B3 are supplements that are taken by mouth that provide some protection against the damaging effects of sunlight . However they are not a replacement for other methods of sun protection .