Temper tantrums are violent emotional outbursts usually in response to frustration .Frustration tiredness and hunger are the most common causes .Children may scream cry thrash roll on the floor throw things and stomp their feet during a tantrum .If distraction does not stop the tantrum the child may have to be removed from the situation .Temper tantrums are common in childhood . They usually appear toward the end of the first year are most common between ages 2 the terrible twos and 4 and are typically infrequent after age 5 . If tantrums are frequent after age 5 they may persist throughout childhood .Causes of temper tantrums include frustration tiredness and hunger . Children also may have temper tantrums to seek attention obtain something or avoid doing something . Parents often place the blame on themselves because of imagined poor parenting when the real cause is often a combination of the child s personality immediate circumstances and developmentally normal behavior . Rarely an underlying mental physical or social problem may be the cause and is more likely if a tantrum lasts for more than 15 minutes or if tantrums occur multiple times each day .A child who is having a temper tantrum may shout scream cry thrash about roll on the floor stomp and throw things . Some of the behavior may be rage like and potentially harmful . The child may become red in the face and hit or kick . Some children may voluntarily hold their breath for a few seconds and then resume normal breathing unlikebreath holding spellswhich also can occur after temper tantrums or crying bouts caused by frustration .See alsoOverview of Behavioral Problems in Children.TreatmentDistractionRemoval from the situationAlthough many children can calm themselves and bring their tantrum under control in a few minutes if they are given a safe setting in which to do so for example atime outother children have difficulty stopping tantrums on their own . In most cases addressing the source of the tantrum only prolongs it . It is therefore preferable to redirect and distract children by providing an alternative activity on which to focus .Children may benefit from being removed physically from the situation .