There are many tools of prevention including the following major toolsEstablishing a healthy lifestyle which includes healthy habits such as wearing a seat belt eating a healthy diet getting enough physical exercise wearing sunscreen and not smokingGettingvaccinatedto prevent infectious diseases such as influenza pneumococcal pneumonia and childhood infectionsFollowing recommendations forscreeningsso that disorders such as high blood pressure and cancer are detected earlyIf people are at high risk of developing certain disorders such as atherosclerosis or have such a disorder taking medications as recommended to prevent the disorder from developing or worsening called preventive medication therapy or chemopreventionPreventive medication therapy includes the followingCholesterol lowering medications to preventatherosclerosisheart attacksand orstrokesin people at increased risk of these disordersbreast cancerin women at increased risk of breast cancerAntihypertensive medicationsto reduce blood pressure and prevent strokesDid You Know . . .Eating a healthy diet exercising regularly and stopping smoking help prevent all three leading causes of death in the United States heart disease cancer and stroke .Healthy LifestyleLifestyle and disease are clearly linked . For example eating an unhealthydiethigh in calories saturated fats and trans fatty acids and deficient in certain other nutrients not exercising regularly and smoking increase the risk of developingheart diseasecancerandstrokethe three leading causes of death in the United States . Changing unhealthy lifestyle habits can help prevent particular disorders and or improve fitness and quality of life . Talking with doctors and other health care professionals can help people make good decisions and establish healthy habits . However establishing and maintaining a healthy lifestyle can be done only by the person . Consistently eating a healthy diet and getting enough exercise are difficult for many people but people who do so reduce their risk of developing serious disorders and often feel better and have more energy .Healthy eating habitscan help people prevent or control disorders such ashigh blood pressureheart diseasediabetesosteoporosisand certain cancers . Recommendations includeEating plenty of vegetables fruits and whole grain cereals and breads partly because such a diet is high infiberReducing consumption ofsaturated fatssuch as those in butter cheese beef pork poultry with the skin and some prepared foods and avoiding trans fatty acidsLimiting calories to maintain recommended body weight see tableBody Mass Index BMILimiting the amount of salt consumedPhysical activity and exercisecan help preventobesityhigh blood pressureheart diseasestrokediabetessome types of cancerconstipationfallsand other health problems . The best routine includes moderate physical activity for a total of 150 minutes per week or vigorous aerobic activity for 75 minutes per week or a combination of the two . Exercise periods should be at least 10 minutes long and ideally spread throughout the week . However getting even a little bit of exercise is much better than none at all . For example people who can devote only 10 minutes to physical activity a few times per week may still reap important benefits particularly if the exercise is vigorous . Walking is one simple effective exercise that many people enjoy . Certain types of exercise can also target specific problems . For example stretching improves flexibility which can help preventfalls. Aerobic exercise may decrease the risk ofheart attackandangina.Quitting smokingSafe sex practicesremain important . Key safe sex practices are avoiding risky sex partners and remaining mutually monogamous . People who have more than one sex partner can greatly reduce their risk of contracting a sexually transmitted infection bycorrectly using a latex condomevery time they have sex . People who are allergic to latex can use other kinds of condoms .Limiting alcohol useis important . The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention CDC recommends that adults of legal drinking age either not drink any alcohol or limit the amount to 2 drinks or less in a day for men or 1 drink or less in a day for women on days when alcohol is consumed . Each drink is about one 12 ounce 341 ml can of beer 5 ounces 142 ml of wine or 1 . 5 ounces 43 ml of liquor of more concentrated liquor such as whiskey . Whether drinking even small amounts of alcohol has any health benefits is unclear . Also drinking even small amounts of alcohol may increase the risk of harmful effects .Preventing injuriesis crucial to maintaining a healthful lifestyle . People can lower their risk of injury by taking certain precautions such as wearing appropriate protective equipment including seat belts . For older people the following can help reduce the risk of fallingRemoving throw rugsHaving good lighting at homeExercising especially to improve balance and muscle strengthHaving vision checked regularly getting the correct glasses and wearing themHaving a doctor nurse or pharmacist review all medications that can contribute to falls whenever prescriptions are added or changedAdequate sleepis also an important part of a healthy lifestyle particularly affecting mood and mental state . Insufficient sleep is a risk factor for injuries .Safety 101Simple common sense safety measures can help prevent injuries . The following are some examplesGeneral SafetyLearnfirst aid.Prepare or purchase a first aid kit .Learncardiopulmonary resuscitationCPR and other methods to relieve airway obstruction such as theHeimlich maneuver.Wear a helmet when riding a bike or motorcycle and wear additional protective equipment as indicated for the sport such as wrist guards for roller blading or skate boarding .Store firearms safely .Practiceswimming safetyand never swim alone .If repetitive wrist motion such as typing is necessary use a position unlikely to increase risk of carpal tunnel syndrome .Exercise regularly and safely .Eliminate or limit alcohol intake .Home SafetyTo prevent falls and fall related injuries in childrenInstall safety locks on basement doors .Close and lock windows when children are present .Replace or cover sharp edged furniture .Do not use baby walkers .Install window guards especially above the first floor .Use stair gates at the top and bottom of stairs .To preventpoisoningNever mix cleaning products .Keep oven and toilet bowl cleaners pesticides alcohol and antifreeze tightly sealed and out of the reach of children .Keep all medications in their original containers and use child protective pill containers if small children are part of the household or are visiting .Follow instructions on how to safely dispose of expired medications and medications that are no longer necessary seeavailable at the Food and Drug Administration s web site .To prevent firesInstall operational smoke detectors on every floor in the home including the basement and in every bedroom .Test batteries every month and install new batteries every 6 months .Plan an escape route and practice it .Keep a fire extinguisher in or near the kitchen .Have the electrical system inspected by a professional .Do not leave lit candles unattended .Do not smoke in bed .To preventcarbon monoxide poisoningEnsure adequate ventilation for indoor sources of combustion such as furnaces hot water heaters wood or charcoal burning stoves and kerosene heaters .Clean flues and chimneys regularly and inspect them for leaks .Use a carbon monoxide detector in the home .To prevent exposure to radonHave the radon level in the home checked .Ensure adequate ventilation especially in the basement .To preventlead poisoningConsult the local health department and ask how to detect toxic levels of lead in the home s drinking water .Find out whether the paint in the house is lead based present in older houses and if there is any question test paint chips .Test ceramic dishes made outside the United States for lead .Have children tested for lead levels if recommended by their doctor .To preventburnsSet the maximum hot water heater temperature at 130F 54 . 44C or less .Food SafetyPay attention to use by dates on packaging .Refrigerate perishable food immediately .Do not buy dented canned goods or anything with a loose or bulging lid .Keep the refrigerator at 40F 4 . 44C and the freezer at 0F 17 . 78C .Freeze fresh meats including fish and poultry that will not be used in 2 days .Do not let the juices from raw meats drip on other foods .Wash hands before and after preparing food .Cook foods thoroughly .Do not use the same utensils or platters for raw and cooked meats .Wash all countertops cutting boards and utensils in hot soapy water after use .Car SafetyObey speed limits and drive defensively .Make sure all passengers wear seat belts .Put children in car seats or other restraints appropriate for their height and weight .Do not allow a baby or child to sit on someone s lap in a moving vehicle .Do not drink alcohol and do not use recreational drugs or medications that cause drowsiness before driving .VaccinationVaccineshave been enormously successful . Dangerous and sometimes fatal infectious diseases such as diphtheria pertussis tetanus mumps measles rubella and polio have decreased by more than 99 from their peak number of cases thanks to the availability of effective and safe vaccines and their widespread use . Furthermore vaccinations save about 16 in health care costs for every 1 spent .Many side effects have been attributed to vaccines seeChildhood Vaccination Concerns. Actual side effects that occur depend on the vaccine but common side effects are usually minor and include swelling soreness and allergic reactions at the injection site and sometimes fever or chills . More serious side effects can occur . They include autoimmune reactions for exampleGuillain syndromewhich causes temporary weakness or paralysis . However serious side effects are very rare if vaccines are used appropriately .Systematic and extensive research has found no link between vaccines and other serious side effects such as autism . Reports that vaccines cause AIDS or sterility are urban legends and have no factual basis . Refusing vaccination to avoid side effects increases the risk of getting an infection which is a much greater threat to health than are possible side effects of vaccination .Did You Know . . .Vaccinations can benefit people other than those receiving the vaccine .Children and adolescents older adults and people whose immune system is impaired are often the most vulnerable to infections that vaccines can prevent . If these people get such infections they are also often the most likely to have serious symptoms . For example whooping cough pertussis tends to cause severe symptoms in infants but can be as mild as a cold in older otherwise healthy people . Although it is most important to vaccinate the most vulnerable people vaccinating other people is also important . Doing so not only prevents illness in the vaccinated person but also reduces the number of people in the community who could develop and thus transmit infection to more vulnerable people . Thus deaths and serious complications in the community are reduced by vaccinating as many people as possible . This effect is called herd immunity .ScreeningScreening is testing of people who are at risk of a disorder but do not have any symptoms see alsoMedical Testing Decisions Screening Tests. Screening can enable doctors to detect a disorder early and to start treatment early . Early treatment sometimes keeps disorders from turning deadly . For example abnormalities of the cervix or colon can be diagnosed and cured before they become cancerous .Screening programs have greatly reduced the number of deaths caused by some disorders . For example deaths due to cervical cancer once the most common cause of cancer death among American women have decreased 75 since 1955 . However the decrease varies from area to area depending on availability and affordability of screening and other factors . Screening can also detect disorders that cannot be cured but that can be treated before they cause too much damage for examplehigh blood pressure.Screening recommendations usually come from government or professional organizations and are based on the best available research . However different organizations sometimes make different recommendations . There are several reasons for different recommendations . Even the best research results are not always conclusive . Also screening recommendations must take into account how much risk and how much expense people are willing to accept factors that cannot be known with certainty . Thus decisions about screening are individualized . People should discuss screening with their doctor to determine what is best for them .Did You Know . . .Some tests to diagnose disorders before symptoms occur screening tests can potentially cause more harm than good .People may think that any test capable of detecting a serious disorder should be done . Screening can offer great benefits . However it can also create problems . For example screening test results are sometimes positive in people who do not have disease . As a result some of these people then have additional follow up tests and or treatments that are unnecessary often expensive and sometimes painful or dangerous .Also sometimes screening detects abnormalities that cannot or need not be treated . For exampleprostate canceroften grows so slowly that in older men the cancer is unlikely to affect their health before they die from another cause . In such cases the treatment can be worse than the disease . Another example involves using whole body computed tomography CT to screen everyone for cancer . This approach is not recommended because it does not have benefits such as saving lives that exceed the risks such as developing disorders caused by the radiation exposure including cancer . In addition when people are told they might have a serious disorder they can become anxious and anxiety can affect health .Because of these issues screening is recommended only whenThe person has some real risk of developing the disorder .The screening test is accurate .The disorder can be more effectively treated when it is diagnosed before symptoms develop .The health care benefits of appropriate screening make it relatively cost effective .Some screening tests such as tests for cervical and colon cancers are recommended for all people of a certain age or sex . For people at increased risk because of other risk factors tests may be recommended at an earlier age or at more frequent intervals than is recommended for people at average risk or additional tests may be recommended . For example a person with a family history of colorectal cancer or with a disease that increases the chances of developingcolorectal cancersuch asulcerative colitiswould be advised to have a screening colonoscopy more often than is normal for people at average risk . If a woman has close relatives who have had breast cancerfamily historyscreening for breast cancer with magnetic resonance imaging MRI in addition to mammography may be recommended .Some screening measures are recommended for people with certain disorders . For example people with diabetes should check their feet at least once a day for redness and ulcers which if ignored may result in severe infection and ultimately amputation .Preventive Medication TherapyPreventive medication therapy also known as chemoprevention is the use of medications to prevent disease . For such therapy to be recommended the person must be at risk of the disorder being prevented and be at low risk of side effects caused by the medication being considered .Three Levels of PreventionThe three levels of prevention are primary secondary and tertiary .Inprimary preventiona disorder is actually prevented from developing .Types of primary prevention include the followingVaccinationsCounseling to change high risk behaviorSometimes chemopreventionInsecondary preventiondisease is detected and treated early often before symptoms are present thus minimizing serious consequences .Types of secondary prevention include the followingScreening programs such as mammography to detect breast cancer and dual x ray absorptiometry DXA to detect osteoporosis .Tracking down the sex partners of a person diagnosed with a sexually transmitted infection contact tracing and if necessary treating these people to minimize spread of the disease .Intertiary preventionan existing usually chronic disease is managed to prevent complications or further damage .Types of tertiary prevention include the followingFor people with diabetes Control of blood sugar excellent skin care frequent examination of the feet and frequent exercise to prevent heart and blood vessel disordersProviding supportive and rehabilitative services to prevent deterioration and maximize quality of life such as rehabilitation from injuries heart attack or strokePreventing complications in people with disabilities such as preventing pressure sores in those confined to bed .