Travel preparation is crucial even for healthy people . Proper preparations are inexpensive relative to the costs of getting sick or injured while away from home .Prior to travel people and their medical providers should review planned itineraries and relevant medical histories recommendedvaccinationsmeasures to prevent infections such asmalariaandtraveler s diarrheaand advice about avoiding injury . For older travelers the most common causes of death are heart attack and stroke for other travelers the most common cause of death is road traffic crashes .The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention CDC recommends that travelers consider getting tested forCOVID 19 infectionwith a viral test as close to the time of departure as possible no more than 3 days before travel see. Additionally travelers can pack unused COVID 19 test kits to test while traveling . Unused test kits are typically allowed in both carry on and checked baggage see.Travel Medical KitsTravel medical kits are useful for minor injuries and illnesses . Useful contents includeFirst aid supplies such as bandages tape elastic wrapAntacidsAntibioticsTravelers should carry their travel medical kit prescription drugs extra eyeglasses or other corrective lenses as well as a current written prescription for either and hearing aid batteries in a carry on bag in case their checked baggage is delayed lost or stolen . People with specific dietary and medical needs should plan carefully and carry their own food and supplies . Major problems can often be prevented with common sense precautions .The U . S . Transportation Safety Administration TSA forbids carrying containers with more than 90 mL 3 ounces of liquid or gel on a commercial flight but the TSA allows larger amounts of medically necessary liquids gels and aerosols in reasonable quantities for the trip . These items must be declared to TSA officers at the checkpoint for inspection see.Travel Health InsuranceHealth insurance is important for travelers . Even with domestic travel some plans limit coverage for health care away from home . Thus travelers should know the limitations of their policies .Coverage is more often a problem for international travel . Some domestic insurance plans limit coverage for vaccinations and preventive drugs for international travel even though some vaccinations are required for entry into certain countries . Likewise Medicare and many commercial health insurance plans are not valid in foreign countries and do not cover the cost of any treatment given outside the United States . In addition a cash deposit or payment in full may be required in international hospitals before care is provided .To avoid high costs or inability to obtain care travelers should determine in advance what international coverage if any their health plan offers how to seek prior authorization for international care and how to make a claim after an emergency . Travel health insurance including insurance for emergency evacuation is available through many commercial agencies travel services and some major credit card companies . Travelers may want to purchase insurance for services such asEmergency care about 1 in 30 people traveling abroad requires emergency careTransportation with accompanying medical personnel equipment and care within foreign countries or back to the United StatesDental carePrenatal or postnatal careLost or stolen prescription drugsMedical translatorsThe International Association for Medical Assistance to Travellers IAMATa nonprofit organization maintains a list of English speaking doctors in cities around the world . Other directories listing English speaking doctors in foreign countries are available from several organizations and web sites . United States consulates may help travelers identify and secure emergency medical services .Vaccinations for TravelVaccinations are important for travel to most developing countries and are required by some countries for entry . Ideally travelers should visit their usual health care practitioners at least 6 to 8 weeks before their travels to get any necessary vaccinations and ensure that they are current on all theirroutine immunizationsincluding forCOVID 19. An International Certificate of Vaccination is the best place to document the names and dates of all vaccinations . The certificate is easy to carry and can be obtained from many travel clinics or from the Superintendent of Documents at the U . S . Government Printing Office .The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention CDC website providesandalso available from the CDC s malaria hotline 855 856 4713 . See alsoMalaria.Preparations For Travelers With Medical ConditionsTraveling with a medical condition requires special preparation . People with a medical condition should visit their doctor before departure to ensure that their condition is stable and to determine whether any changes in drugs are needed . Detailed written medical information may be the most valuable thing a person can have in a medical emergency including information aboutVaccinationsDrugsResults of major diagnostic testsTypes and dates of treatmentsPeople should consider asking their doctor to prepare such information in a letter . Medical identification bracelets or necklaces are essential for people with conditions that can cause rapid life threatening symptoms confusion or unconsciousness such as diabetes seizures and severe allergic reactions . Travelers with heart disorders should travel with a copy of a recent electrocardiogram ECG . Travelers should also carry proof of medical insurance .Drugs should remain in their original bottles so that the precise names of the drugs and the instructions for taking them can be reviewed in an emergency . The generic name of a drug is more useful than its brand name because brand names differ among countries .Travelers should also pack an extra supply of drugs in carry on bags in case checked bags get lost stolen or delayed in transit or the return trip is delayed . Because opioids syringes and large amounts of any drug are likely to raise the suspicions of security or customs officers travelers should have a doctor s note explaining the medical need for the supplies . In addition syringes should be packed together with the drugs that are dispensed in them . Travelers should also check with airports airlines or embassies to determine what additional documentation is helpful in making travel with these supplies go smoothly . See also.More InformationThe following English language resources may be useful . Please note that THE MANUAL is not responsible for the content of the resources .Travelers Health