If you log in, you can enjoy more diverse benefits. Our eyes are comprised of black and white parts, and the part covering the black part is called the cornea. The cornea appears black, but in reality it is a transparent part without light, and due to its characteristic of lacking blood vessels, it receives oxygen through tears from the air. The cornea plays the role of a window for the eye, protecting the eye from external factors, allowing light to pass through and refracting it for vision. If the cornea is damaged and becomes cloudy, visual impairment can occur even if there are no functional issues because light cannot enter the eye. It is located on the outermost surface of the eye. Similar to a transparent and blood vessel-free membrane located on the surface of the black part of the eye, it is the part through which light first passes. It occupies the front 1/6 of the outer membrane, a thin structure of 0.5mm, maintaining a very transparent structure to allow light to pass through. While the cornea is actually transparent tissue, it appears dark because there is no light inside the eye. When cloudiness occurs in this part, it is called corneal cloudiness, and the condition in which the lens becomes opaque is called cataracts. The cornea is composed of five layers, and the outermost corneal epithelium is continuously generated and shed, so damage limited to this layer heals naturally without any complications. Damage to the other layers may result in corneal cloudiness or scarring. In some cases, a corneal transplant may be necessary. Acting as a protective barrier from the external environment and the primary passage of light, it contributes to the visual function by refracting incoming light for vision. This plays a crucial role in vision. The refraction of light entering the eye to focus on the retina is largely managed by the cornea, while the lens adjusts the thickness and curvature to help with focusing. Surgery to transplant the entire eye is currently impossible with current medical technology, and the cornea is the only part of the eye that can be transplanted. Corneal transplant surgery is performed to remove a clouded cornea due to various reasons and transplant a new cornea from a donor to improve vision.