Logging in will allow you to access more diverse benefits. The hepatic vein is a blood vessel that carries blood from the portal vein and hepatic artery in the liver through the inferior vena cava to the heart for circulation to the lower extremities, abdomen, and pelvis. It is located on the back of the liver, just under the diaphragm and between the liver and the inferior vena cava. It is divided into three main veins that connect with the liver parenchyma and join the inferior vena cava to send blood to the heart. The left hepatic vein passes between the 2nd and 3rd segments of the liver, the middle hepatic vein runs between the medial and anterior sectors of the liver, and the right hepatic vein runs between the anterior and posterior sectors. The blood transported through the hepatic veins contains blood from the liver itself as well as most of the blood coming from abdominal organs. In cases of hepatic vein occlusion, where conditions such as thrombosis or tumors obstruct the flow of blood in the hepatic veins, preventing the blood flow from the liver to the heart, it is known as Budd-Chiari syndrome. Congestion occurs in the liver as blood and fluids accumulate, resulting in an enlarged liver, and fluids may accumulate in other organs such as the spleen and esophagus as well. Concurrently, the spleen enlarges and the veins of the esophagus dilate, leading to symptoms such as upper abdominal pain and ascites in the abdominal cavity. To induce more severe ischemic damage to the hepatic parenchyma than in portal vein embolization, additional hepatic vein embolization may be performed. Sequentially performing portal vein embolization and hepatic vein embolization results in severe ischemic damage enough to prevent abscess formation on one side of the liver, leading to hepatic parenchymal shrinkage and promoting regeneration of the contralateral liver. This is a method that can be performed before hepatectomy. Sinusoidal hypertension caused by the liver can lead to complications such as varices, ascites, and hepatic encephalopathy. The most accurate method for evaluating sinusoidal hypertension is using the hepatic vein pressure gradient, which is the difference between the portal vein pressure and the hepatic vein pressure. Hepatic vein pressure gradient can be measured by inserting a catheter into the hepatic vein or femoral vein. 