If you log in, you can take advantage of more benefits. The arachnoid, a membrane that envelops our brains, is called arachnoid because it looks like a spider web. The meninges that envelop the brain are divided into three layers: dura mater, arachnoid, and pia mater, with the arachnoid being the middle layer. The arachnoid is part of the meninges that envelope the brain and is located between the dura mater and pia mater. The arachnoid, located in the middle layer of the meninges, has a delicate fibrous connective tissue structure resembling spider webs. Unlike other membranes, it does not contain blood vessels. There is a space called the subarachnoid space between the arachnoid and pia mater, which is connected to the fourth ventricle. This space is filled with dense fibrous connective tissue fibers and cerebrospinal fluid. Blood vessels that supply nutrients and oxygen also pass through this space. A structure protruding from the arachnoid towards the meninges is called the arachnoid villus, which is most abundant around the superior sagittal sinus. Cerebrospinal fluid flowing through the subarachnoid space is filtered at the arachnoid villus and absorbed into the venous blood in the meningeal venous sinuses. It is a protective membrane that surrounds the brain and spinal cord, and cerebrospinal fluid flows into the dural sinuses via the cerebral veins, eventually reaching the heart. The brain is protected from shocks by the cerebrospinal fluid in the subarachnoid space. Risk factors for cerebrovascular diseases such as hypertension, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, and smoking should be monitored and controlled regularly. Smoking carries a significant risk of rupturing brain blood vessels, so quitting smoking is highly recommended. Warning headaches, which are usually not severe and improve after about a day, are often caused by minor bleeding but may indicate the possibility of more severe bleeding in the future. Therefore, if you are over 45 years old and experience warning headaches, it is advisable not to ignore them and seek medical attention. By identifying the causes of simple headaches, ptosis caused by oculomotor nerve paralysis, diplopia, etc., it may be possible to identify brain blood vessels that have not yet ruptured. In such cases, receiving appropriate treatment before the blood vessels rupture can prevent fatal complications.