If you log in, you can enjoy even more diverse benefits. It is a transparent and thin membrane that covers the inside of the eyelid and the exposed outer surface of the eyeball. It is located below the eyelid and in the front part of the eye. It is a thin, transparent mucous membrane that wraps around the front part of the eyeball from the front of the eyeball. The conjunctiva forms one sac at the boundary of the palpebral fissure of the eyelid. It consists of the bulbar conjunctiva firmly attached to the back of the eyelid, the fornix conjunctiva covering the front part of the sclera, and the orbital conjunctiva connecting the bulbar and fornix conjunctiva. The conjunctiva combines the eyelid and eyeball to prevent the eye from falling out, secreting mucus and tears to prevent microbial invasion while helping lubricate the eye. Because the conjunctiva is exposed to the outside, it is especially vulnerable to microbial invasion, coming into contact with allergens such as dust, pollen, cosmetics, etc., causing inflammation. Inflammation occurring in the conjunctiva is called conjunctivitis, and it is classified into different types depending on the symptoms. If the conjunctiva is severely congested, secreting mucous discharge, and contagious, bacterial conjunctivitis may be suspected, mainly caused by pneumococci and self-healing. Epidemic viral conjunctivitis is caused by a virus, feeling gritty like sand in the eyes, increased eye discharge, should be treated with antibiotic eye drops while minimizing eye irritation. Acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis, also known as Apollo eye disease, is transmitted by contact with people, causing eye pain, redness, muscle weakness, and should be treated with antibiotic eye drops. There are other types of conjunctivitis such as allergic, viral, chlamydial conjunctivitis, it is good to avoid factors that cause the disease and sometimes eye drops may be necessary. If you experience prolonged discomfort in your eyes that is different from usual, it is advisable to see an ophthalmologist. Conjunctival hemorrhage is when a fine blood vessel that spreads in the white part of the eyeball bursts. It can occur from rubbing your eyes, trauma, increased eye pressure, presence of hemorrhagic factors, or eye-related surgery. Conjunctival hemorrhage will heal without any special treatment once the absorbed blood is removed. However, depending on the extent of the hemorrhage, the duration may vary, and it is advisable to consult a doctor if there are other eye conditions or repeated hemorrhages.