If you log in, you can enjoy more various benefits.  The testicles, the egg-shaped gland that produces sperm and male hormones, are located singularly in each of the left and right scrotal sacs. The testicles are originally located in the abdomen during fetal development and then descend towards the scrotum before birth. The testicles are composed of hundreds of lobules, within which sperm is produced in the seminiferous tubules. The produced sperm then travels through the epididymis and vas deferens to be ejaculated through the urethra. They are found in the lower part of the pelvic region in males, one in each of the left and right scrotal sacs. The testicles are surrounded by visceral and parietal layers and are divided into several hundred lobules. Within the lobules, there are seminiferous tubules where sperm is produced. The produced sperm goes through the epididymis and vas deferens to the urethra. The interstitial cells located outside the seminiferous tubules secrete male hormones related to secondary sexual characteristics. The testicles perform both an exocrine function by producing and secreting mature sperm and an endocrine function by synthesizing and secreting the male hormone testosterone. The testicles, being the outermost organ in the human body, are exposed to allow efficient heat dissipation due to less subcutaneous fat and more wrinkles in the scrotal sac than other skin areas. Therefore, the testicles maintain a temperature 2-3 degrees lower than the core body temperature. Several studies have reported that an increase in testicular temperature for several hours can reduce sperm motility and increase the number of abnormal sperm, indicating the importance of maintaining the testicular temperature lower for normal sperm production. Cryptorchidism refers to the condition where the testicles do not descend properly into the scrotum during prenatal development and instead remain in the abdomen. If the testicles remain in the abdomen for an extended period, it can lead to issues with sperm production due to the higher temperature in the abdomen, necessitating a surgical procedure called orchidopexy to bring the testicles down into the scrotum.