If you log in, you can enjoy more benefits. Located at the bottom of the abdomen, it connects the torso and legs and protects the organs inside the abdomen. The pelvis consists of two pubic bones on each side and the back consists of the sacrum and coccyx. The pelvis connects the spine and legs, playing an important role in our ability to walk. It is located at the bottom of the abdomen and narrows downward in a funnel shape. The pelvis consists of two pubic bones on each side and the back consists of the sacrum and coccyx. The pubic bones are symmetrical on both sides and are made up of the ilium, ischium, and pubis. The ischial tuberosities, which receive force when sitting, are located on both sides underneath the hip joint. The distance between the ischial tuberosities is an important indicator. The ischium (ischium bone) is the largest part of the pubic bones that make up the upper and back of the pelvis. It exists in the front of the pelvis and forms the pubic symphysis with ligaments and cartilage. The sacrum is a bone formed by the fusion of 5 vertebral bodies at the back of the pelvis and has great significance as a short axis at the entrance of the pelvis. It is located under the coccyx and is formed by the fusion of 4 vertebral bodies. The pelvis connects the spine and legs, supporting body weight and enabling walking. It also plays a role in protecting internal organs such as the intestines, uterus, ovaries, and bladder from external impacts. There is a method called pelvic measurement to check if normal delivery is possible for pregnant women. For a normal delivery to be possible, the pelvic circumference must be larger than the largest diameter of the fetal head. Women have a wider and shorter pelvis compared to men because they need to give birth. The pelvic space in women is wider due to this structural difference. The pelvic inlet in men is heart-shaped, while in women, it is wide and oval-shaped, and the pelvic outlet is also wider. During childbirth, the baby's head must come out, so the sacrum tilts further backward.