If you log in, you can enjoy a variety of benefits. The coronary artery surrounds the heart from the part where the aorta starts and supplies blood to the heart. The diameter of the artery is the thickness between medium-sized arteries and small arteries, dividing into two branches from the base of the aorta and surrounding the entire heart. It spreads to every corner of the heart, resembling a crown shape, which is why it is called the coronary artery. The coronary artery branches into the left anterior descending artery and the left circumflex artery, forming two branches, and is composed of a total of three vessels. Unlike other arteries where blood is supplied when the heart contracts, the coronary artery supplies blood when the heart finishes contracting and blood flows back through the aorta. If the coronary artery becomes blocked, it causes chest pain known as coronary artery disease. When the flow of the coronary artery is blocked and insufficient blood supply results in pain in the chest, it is called angina pectoris. When the coronary artery is completely blocked and there is no blood supply to the heart muscle, causing part of the heart muscle to decay, it is called myocardial infarction. The main cause of the coronary artery disease is usually atherosclerosis, which is caused by high blood pressure, high cholesterol, obesity, smoking, and diabetes. It can also be caused by genetic predisposition or cases of the disease within the family. When the demand for blood increases due to increased physical activity or faster heart rate during excitement, the narrowed coronary artery in some people cannot supply enough blood, leading to chest tightness and pain. In the case of angina pectoris resulting from partial narrowing of blood vessels, symptoms naturally improve after rest, but in the case of complete coronary artery occlusion, symptoms do not improve even with rest, and the longer the artery closure time, the more damage to the heart muscle. Myocardial infarction leads to chest pain lasting more than 30 minutes, cold sweats, and general weakness. Treatment for coronary artery disease involves reducing heart activity, using beta-blockers, nitroglycerin, calcium antagonists, and simultaneous treatment for underlying diseases. Percutaneous coronary intervention involves inflating the narrowed part of the coronary artery with a balloon and, if necessary, fixing it with a stent. It can be performed easily, but it has the disadvantage of possibly narrowing again within a few months. In the coronary artery bypass surgery, a blood vessel from another part of the body is connected to the area of the coronary artery with insufficient blood flow due to stenosis, improving blood flow. The surgery temporarily stops the heartbeats and connects an artificial cardiopulmonary bypass machine, then connects a bypass vessel around the blocked coronary artery. Arteries like the internal mammary artery, radial artery, or saphenous vein are commonly used.