By logging in, you can enjoy even more benefits. The organ responsible for receiving and perceiving sound, which is one of the sensory organs, is composed of the outer ear, middle ear, and inner ear. The outer ear is the part that transmits sound to the ear drum, the middle ear transmits vibrations from the ear drum to the cochlea, and the inner ear is where the cochlea, a part that directly senses sound, is located. It is situated on the sides of the face. The ear can be divided into the outer ear, middle ear, and inner ear. The outer ear consists of the auricle and external auditory canal. The auricle is made of cartilage and functions to collect sound. The external auditory canal prevents foreign substances from entering from the auricle to the ear drum and acts as a resonating chamber with an S shape. The middle ear is composed of the ear drum, ossicles, tympanic cavity, tensor tympani muscle, and Eustachian tube, transmitting vibrations that enter through the external auditory canal to the inner ear through the ear drum and ossicles. The ear drum acts as a protective barrier for the middle ear and plays an important role in sound conduction. The ossicles, including the malleus, incus, and stapes, deliver vibrations arriving at the ear drum to the oval window of the inner ear. The tympanic cavity is an air-filled cavity located between the outer ear and inner ear and is known as the middle ear cavity. The tensor tympani muscle protects the inner ear through the tympanic reflex. The Eustachian tube, also known as the auditory tube, ventilates the middle ear and drains secretions. The inner ear consists of the vestibular organ, cochlea, and semicircular canals. It is filled with fluid and has a complex structure, often referred to as a labyrinth. The inner ear detects sound and maintains balance in the body. The cochlea converts sound waves transmitted from the middle ear into nerve impulses for sound recognition. The vestibular organ detects and processes the sense of balance. The semicircular canals detect and process the sense of balance. The ear enables us to hear sounds and maintain balance in our body. When sound waves reach the inner ear through the air, the ear drum vibrates, which in turn causes vibrations in the ossicles. These bone vibrations stimulate the hair cells of the cochlea, which generate electrical signals. The auditory nerve then sends these signals to the brain, allowing us to perceive the sound. The vestibular organ and semicircular canals in the inner ear play a role in maintaining our body's balance. Feeling nauseous when riding in a car or on a boat is due to the difference between visual information and balance information. While the eyes send signals to the brain that the body is stationary inside a moving vehicle, the balance organs in the ear signal the brain of movement, leading to motion sickness. Therefore, when experiencing motion sickness, looking at the scenery outside the window to align visual information with balance information can help alleviate the symptoms.