If you log in, you can enjoy even more benefits. The fascia is a type of connective tissue that surrounds muscles, protecting and supporting them. It is located between all skin and muscle, distributing throughout the body. The fascia is a fibrous tissue that covers muscles, nerves, blood vessels, bones, and ligaments, with its thickness varying depending on its location. It is composed of very strong collagen components, with fiber bundles crossing in multiple directions. The fascia surrounds the muscles externally, supporting and protecting the internal structures of the body. It also prevents excessive muscle contraction. It wraps and protects not only muscles but also bones, blood vessels, nerves, and organs, placing them in appropriate positions. It plays a role in separating and connecting organs, spreading throughout the body like a mesh, organically connecting the body. When the fascia is damaged, deformation and adhesions occur, limiting muscle movement and causing stiffness and pain. Many people complain of pain in the soles of their feet, particularly pain in the heel or a feeling of tearing in the sole of the foot, which is often due to plantar fasciitis, a pain caused by inflammation of the plantar fascia. The plantar fascia is a non-elastic structure that links the heel bone (calcaneus) and the proximal end of the five metatarsal bones, supporting the arch of the foot and increasing tension in the late stance phase of walking. When walking a lot or engaging in activities like running, more tension is applied to the plantar fascia, increasing the risk of injury. Plantar fasciitis occurs from activities such as excessive walking or running, changing shoes, exercising on hard surfaces, and age-related loss of elasticity in the plantar fascia. When diagnosed with plantar fasciitis, wearing cushioned shoes with good shock absorption can help distribute weight and relieve pain. Resting for 2-3 weeks while applying heat, stretching, and taking anti-inflammatory pain relievers is often recommended.