If you log in, you can enjoy even more benefits. It is a mechanism that allows exercise by attaching it to bones that make up our body's skeleton. Our body's muscles can be divided into skeletal muscles, cardiac muscles, and visceral muscles, and can be further classified into voluntary muscles that can be contracted at will and involuntary muscles that cannot be controlled, as well as striped muscles and smooth muscles based on their appearance. It is present in all parts of our body responsible for movement. It is a muscle that attaches to bones and allows movement, constituting most of our body's muscle tissue. Skeletal muscle is a striped muscle and a voluntary muscle. Skeletal muscles are composed of numerous muscle fibers. Muscle fibers are thin, long cylindrical cells that contain multiple nuclei and mitochondria that produce energy needed for muscle contraction. Muscle fibers are made up of thread-like structures called myofibrils, and myofibrils are composed of myofilaments. Myofilaments contain actin and myosin, which are involved in muscle contraction. They all have a bundle shape. Smooth muscle that makes up the walls of the internal organs of our digestive system is a smooth muscle and is called involuntary muscle because it is controlled by the autonomic nervous system. It is a muscle found only in the heart, and structurally similar to skeletal muscle being striped muscle, but functionally, it is an involuntary muscle controlled by the autonomic nervous system, possessing characteristics of both skeletal and visceral muscles. Muscles are responsible for our body's movement and manipulation, maintaining posture and extending joints. They also play a crucial role in moving the heart and internal organs to sustain life. Muscle contraction can be divided into isotonic contraction, isometric contraction, and isokinetic contraction, allowing for various muscle strengthening exercises. Isotonic contraction refers to tension generated without a change in the length of muscle fibers and includes exercises like hanging from a horizontal bar or pressing a wall with both hands. Isometric contraction involves muscle shortening despite a constant tension on the muscle, such as lifting a weight and bending and extending the arm. Isokinetic contraction combines isotonic and isometric contractions, applying maximum resistance to muscles through the full range of joint motion, enabling rapid muscle strength improvement within a short time, commonly used by athletes in training.