If you log in, you can enjoy even more benefits. It is the organ that controls the central nervous system of our body. The brain regulates our body movements and behavior, maintains the homeostasis of the body, and is responsible for cognitive, emotional, memory, and learning functions. It is located inside the skull. The weight of an adult brain is about 1.4-1.6kg, and the smallest unit that makes up the brain is a nerve cell called a neuron. The brain is contained within the skull and meninges, connected to the spinal cord below, and filled with cerebrospinal fluid inside. The brain is divided into the cerebrum, cerebellum, and brainstem, and further subdivided into midbrain, pons (bridge), and medulla oblongata. It occupies most of the brain and is composed of two hemispheres. It performs functions such as sensation, perception, movement, skill, imagination, reasoning, language ability, insight, autonomous nervous system control, hormone regulation, and homeostasis maintenance. Located beneath the cerebrum, it represents 10% of the total brain and helps correct body posture and muscle tension to allow for more precise movements and maintain balance sensation. It is composed of numerous nerve fibers and is responsible for respiratory and cardiovascular control between the spinal cord and the pons. Motor control function: When signals for movement are sent from the cerebral cortex to the brainstem and spinal cord, they are then transmitted to the necessary muscles so that we can move our body as desired. Sensory perception and interpretation function: It allows us to perceive and feel the signals coming from the body's sensory organs by receiving and processing them in the cerebral cortex. Language communication function: It is performed in the cerebral cortex, with Broca's area in the frontal lobe responsible for speech production and Wernicke's area in the temporal lobe responsible for language comprehension. Homeostasis maintenance function: Mainly performed in the hypothalamus, it regulates the body's metabolism through control of the autonomous nervous system and hormone secretion. Learning and memory function: Performed in the hippocampus in the temporal lobe of the cerebrum. Hormone secretion function: Performed in the pituitary gland, it secretes hormones related to the body's metabolism and reproduction. Complete cessation of overall brain function, including the brainstem, in an irreversible state is referred to as brain death. Brain death refers to a state where the brainstem has stopped functioning, consciousness is absent due to damage to the cerebral cortex, but brainstem functions such as breathing and digestion are maintained, which is different from a vegetative state.