If you log in, you can enjoy even more benefits. The brain has connected empty spaces, and such interconnected empty spaces in the brain are called ventricles. The ventricles are filled with cerebrospinal fluid, and they are called different names depending on their locations. The largest ventricle, the lateral ventricle, is located at the part where the cerebral hemisphere divides, connected to the third ventricle. The third ventricle and the fourth ventricle are connected through the cerebral aqueduct, and the fourth ventricle is located in the middle of the brainstem. Ventricles consist of the lateral ventricles, third ventricle, and fourth ventricle located on the left and right sides. The four ventricles are interconnected, each ventricle has choroid plexus that produces cerebrospinal fluid. The lateral ventricle is located within the cerebral hemispheres, and the third ventricle, a narrow empty space between the midbrain, connects to it. The lateral ventricle is divided into four parts: the frontal horn in the frontal lobe, the body in the parietal lobe, the trigone in the occipital lobe, and the inferior horn in the temporal lobe. The third ventricle and fourth ventricle are connected through the cerebral aqueduct in the midbrain. The fourth ventricle is a space surrounded by part of the cerebellum and the inferior part of the cerebellum. It is connected to the central canal of the spinal cord below and is connected to the entire spinal cord. The inner surface of the ventricle is covered with ependymal cells. Part of the ventricle wall contains choroid plexus with blood vessels, where cerebrospinal fluid is produced and secreted into the ventricle. Cerebrospinal fluid circulates slowly within the ventricles and the subarachnoid space. The ventricles produce cerebrospinal fluid, which then flows from the lateral ventricle through the third ventricle to the fourth ventricle. Of course, cerebrospinal fluid is produced in the choroid plexus within each ventricle. The choroid plexus is a pocket-shaped structure called the arachnoid granulation through which cerebrospinal fluid flows out and joins the bloodstream. This cerebrospinal fluid provides nutrients to the central nervous tissue and performs functions such as excreting metabolic waste. Ventriculomegaly is a condition where the ventricles of the brain are enlarged. It accounts for the majority of fetal brain malformations. The normal size of the ventricles is about 7mm, and ventriculomegaly is diagnosed when the ventricle size exceeds 10mm. It may be caused by fetal viral infection, chromosomal abnormalities, or various brain malformations that block the pathway of cerebrospinal fluid. Therefore, if ventriculomegaly is diagnosed in a fetus, a detailed ultrasound examination should be performed to check for other associated malformations, and amniotic fluid testing or cord blood testing should be carried out to confirm viral infections and chromosomal abnormalities. If all the tests yield normal results, the prognosis of the fetus is determined by the degree of ventriculomegaly. In males, as their brain ventricles are naturally larger than those in females, if the ventricle sizes are similar, males tend to show a better prognosis than females. Ventriculomegaly can also be affected by changes in size depending on the gestational age, so monitoring changes in size and characteristics through follow-up examinations is important if ventriculomegaly is diagnosed without other abnormalities.