By logging in, you can enjoy even more various benefits. The pituitary gland, located at the center of the brain, is a small endocrine gland that controls various hormone secretions in our bodies. The pituitary gland is divided into anterior and posterior lobes, each secreting different hormones that influence our body's reproduction, growth, and metabolism. It is located below the center of the brain, just above the sphenoid bone. The pituitary gland is about 1.2 ~ 1.5 cm in size and weighs around 500 ~ 600 mg, divided into anterior and posterior lobes. The anterior lobe of the pituitary gland is composed of polygonal cells and originates from the mouth. The posterior lobe of the pituitary gland originates from the hypothalamus and is smaller in size compared to the anterior lobe. The pituitary gland is a central organ that regulates hormones in our bodies, secreting 5 hormones from the anterior lobe and 2 hormones from the posterior lobe. It plays a role in stimulating body growth during adolescence and growth periods. It acts on the adrenal cortex to promote adrenal hormone secretion by stimulating the secretion of prolactin, and the amount of adrenal cortex-stimulating hormone secretion increases under stress. It stimulates the reproductive glands to promote sex hormone secretion and stimulates the synthesis and secretion of thyroid hormones. It increases the reabsorption of water in the kidneys to reduce the amount of urine or constrict blood vessels to raise blood pressure. During childbirth, it promotes uterine contractions with oxytocin, and during breastfeeding, it stimulates milk secretion. The pituitary gland secretes various hormones, and if its function is impaired, a deficiency of these hormones can lead to problems. This condition is called hypopituitarism. In the case of hormones secreted by the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland, problems can arise from disorders in the pituitary gland or hypothalamus, while the creation of hormones secreted by the posterior lobe occurs entirely in the hypothalamus, so even if the pituitary gland is damaged, it may not be affected. Hypopituitarism is treated by supplementing the deficient hormones.