If you log in, you can enjoy a wider range of benefits. The eye is an organ that conveys visual information to the brain through a multi-step structure. Located above the face, on both the left and right sides, the eye has a length of about 24mm, approximately the size of a ping pong ball. The structure of the eye can be divided into the sclera, choroid, and retina according to its functions. The sclera is the outermost layer of the eyeball, which is white and helps maintain the shape of the eye. The cornea and aqueous humor, lens, and vitreous humor that refract light are present within the sclera. The choroid, known as the vascular layer, includes the iris and ciliary body. The choroid supplies the eye with oxygen and nutrients through rich blood vessels. The retina is the innermost layer of the eye where nerves distribute. The central part where light directly reaches in the retina is called the macula, which detects light most finely. The eye, as a visual organ conveying visual information to the brain, functions similarly to a camera. When visual information enters, the cornea and lens refract light to project the image onto the retina. The iris exists between the cornea and lens, regulating the amount of incoming light like the aperture of a camera. The incoming light passes through the vitreous humor to focus on the final retina, and the image formed on the retina is transmitted to the brain through the optic nerve for perception. Our eyelids protect the eyes from external stimuli and regulate the amount of light. The tear glands maintain the surface of the cornea and expel tears necessary for cleaning foreign substances. In the hot summer and vacation season, people seek cool sea or swimming pools. An infectious eye disease caused by bacteria and viruses can startle us during vacations. Conjunctivitis caused by adenovirus and enterovirus is highly contagious and tends to occur in groups. For epidemic conjunctivitis, prevention of transmission is crucial. The most important measure is handwashing, avoiding sharing towels, soap, etc. with others, staying away from people with eye diseases, and preferably avoiding places with many people like swimming pools or public baths.