By logging in, you can enjoy a variety of benefits. The cochlea is responsible for hearing as an auditory organ, filled with lymph fluid and distributed with auditory cells inside. It is located in the innermost part of the ear. The ear is an organ responsible for hearing and balance and is composed externally from the outer ear, middle ear, and inner ear in that order. The innermost part, the inner ear, houses the vestibular organ responsible for balance and the cochlea responsible for hearing. Among them, the cochlea is a spiral-shaped tunnel-like organ made up of two and a half turns. Inside the cochlea is an auditory organ called the organ of Corti, which converts sound vibrations into electrical signals and transmits them to the brain. The organ of Corti is evenly distributed throughout the cochlea. The auditory nerve that branches off from the brainstem connects to the cochlea and is responsible for hearing, transforming sound vibrations into electrical signals. If a tumor develops in the area where the auditory nerve passes through, neurological symptoms may occur depending on the location. The cochlea functions to enable hearing. When sound reaches the inner ear through the outer and middle ear, it vibrates the lymph fluid inside the cochlea, and the auditory cells respond to the movement. The auditory cells convert the signal into the brain through the auditory nerve, and only then does the brain recognize the sound. Once it reaches the part of the auditory cortex in the brain through various brain regions, it senses the feeling of "hearing" and judges the contents heard in the temporal and parietal lobes of the brain. If there is an issue with the cochlea, one may lose the ability to hear, and clear treatment in such cases is difficult. An artificial cochlea acts to convert sound into electrical stimulation of the auditory nerve to relay it to the brain, thus providing some degree of sound transmission. Cochlear implant surgery is performed when both cochleae have been damaged and everyday communication is impossible even with hearing aids. However, if there is still some level of hearing left and communication is possible with hearing aids or if only one ear has a hearing impairment, the surgery is not performed, as inserting a cochlear implant would largely destroy the remaining hearing. Cochlear implants consist of an external processor that captures sound and converts it into electrical signals, and an internal implant receiver that receives signals from the processor and stimulates the auditory nerve. Performing surgery to allow hearing before the age of three can prevent degeneration of the auditory-language center in the brain. Therefore, it is advisable to treat hearing loss as early as possible. For children who have not learned to speak, having cochlear implant surgery after the age of seven, especially after adolescence, may not result in the same level of positive language development as children who had the surgery earlier.