If you login, you can enjoy more benefits. It is the skin tissue that surrounds the surface of tofu and protects the inside of the tofu. It is located at the top of the head bounded by the front, side face, and back neck. The scalp is a part of the skin with a similar structure, but it has more complex and sebaceous glands than other parts of the skin and more blood vessels and hair follicles distributed than other outer coverings of the body. The dermis layer contains capillaries that cause bleeding due to head trauma and allows sensory perception through dense nerve distribution to sense through the hair. The scalp is composed of three layers. It consists of an outer layer with arteries, veins, and nerves, a connective nerve tissue that surrounds the skull muscles, and a thin, fat-free, relaxed periorbita tissue. Protection: Melanin pigments and the epidermis protect the scalp from light, prevent the scalp from drying out, and protect the scalp from external infections and microbial invasions by forming an acidic barrier. It responds to external friction and protects the scalp from the external environment through the stratum corneum, subcutaneous tissue, and connective tissue. Respiration: About 1-3% of the human body respiration occurs through the skin rather than the lungs. If dead skin cells or wastes accumulate on the scalp, it can block the pores of the scalp and hinder skin respiration. Secretion and excretion: Sweat glands discharge sweat for temperature regulation, and sebaceous glands secrete sebum to prevent moisture evaporation and protect against bacterial infection. Temperature regulation: The arrector pili muscles contract and relax to open and close the pores, maintaining body temperature, and regulating body temperature by controlling the blood flow of capillaries. Vitamin D synthesis: Provitamin D is converted to vitamin D through sunlight and is absorbed into the body. The absorbed vitamin D promotes the absorption of calcium and is involved in bone formation. Seborrheic dermatitis can progress to hair loss at a rapid rate when excess sebum is secreted in the scalp. Treatment methods emphasize correcting lifestyle habits, getting enough rest and sleep to relieve fatigue, and increasing blood circulation through adequate exercise and stretching. The key to preventing hair loss is to keep the scalp clean and healthy. If sebum is excessive, it is advisable to wash your hair once a day and remove dandruff and sebum from the scalp. Use a gentle and mild shampoo and massage the scalp while creating plenty of foam. If soap foam remains on the scalp, it can clog scalp pores and cause hair loss, so rinse off the soap foam completely.