If you log in, you can enjoy more benefits. The peripheral nervous system refers to the nervous system that branches out from the central nervous system and distributes throughout the body in a network-like manner. The peripheral nervous system transmits all the information needed for sensation, muscle stimulation, and involuntary reflexes from our body to the central nervous system, and also serves as a pathway to transmit motor stimuli from the central nervous system back to our body. The peripheral nervous system can be divided into the somatic nervous system and the autonomic nervous system, both of which are distributed throughout our body. The structure of the peripheral nervous system consists of neurons and synapses, similar to the central nervous system. In the peripheral nervous system, sensory nerves are located on the dorsal side of the spinal cord, while motor nerves are located on the ventral side. Cranial nerves and spinal nerves are included in this system. There are 12 pairs of cranial nerves that originate from the brain. Along the spinal canal, there are 31 pairs of spinal nerves that are named accordingly. The autonomic nervous system can be further divided into the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems, which have opposing functions. They branch out from the middle portion of the spinal cord to various internal organs. They also branch out from the midbrain, pons, and the tail end of the spinal cord to different internal organs. The somatic nervous system connects the commands received from the central nervous system to skeletal muscles to produce muscle movements, and it transmits sensory information from the sensory organs to the central nervous system to allow us to sense stimuli. The autonomic nervous system can function independently without receiving commands from the brain, and it maintains homeostasis in the body according to the situation. Systems under the control of the autonomic nervous system, such as the endocrine, lungs, and respiration, are beyond our conscious control. The sympathetic nervous system helps respond quickly in emergency situations. When the sympathetic nervous system is stimulated, blood flow to the skeletal muscles and nerves increase, heart rate accelerates, and sensitivity also intensifies. The parasympathetic nervous system works towards storing energy in preparation for emergencies. When the parasympathetic nervous system is stimulated, blood flow to the internal organs increases, promoting digestion and excretion while slowing down heart rate and reducing energy consumption.