If you login, you can enjoy more benefits. The knee cartilage is a fibrous, crescent-shaped tissue that plays a role in cushioning impact when tension or twist occurs between the femur and tibia of the knee. It is located in the space between the femur and tibia of both knees. The knee consists of articular cartilage and meniscus cartilage. The articular cartilage is a smooth, firm, and elastic tissue that covers the knee joint surface. The meniscus cartilage is divided into two types depending on its position. The lateral meniscus is smaller and round like a wheel, while the medial meniscus is a wide and large C-shape that wraps around the medial knee cartilage. The knee cartilage supports our body and stabilizes the joint to prevent it from wobbling. When the knee joint bears weight, it absorbs and disperses shocks, and the meniscus cartilage evenly distributes the synovial fluid in the joint cavity to facilitate smooth joint movement. Cartilage can easily wear out and tear with repeated use, and once damaged, it cannot be repaired as it lacks blood circulation. In elderly patients, the cartilage can weaken and thin, leading to cartilage tears without trauma, known as degenerative meniscus tears. Eating pig or chicken bones attached with cartilage can be good for the joints? The main components of the joints are glucosamine and chondroitin. Pig or chicken bones may contain a significant amount of these components. However, these substances don't get directly absorbed into our bodies by consuming such foods, so they do not help in the treatment or prevention of arthritis. It is more important to prevent obesity through proper weight management. Good exercises for arthritis patients without putting too much strain on the joint cartilage include stationary biking, aquatic exercises, walking, etc. Aquatic exercises and walking for 20-40 minutes per session, brisk walking for 20 minutes, and yoga or qigong for about 30 minutes, more than 3 times a week, are considered appropriate. Regular exercise is the most effective way to reduce and prevent functional decline in patients with chronic arthritis by keeping the joints moving. For patients with arthritis, it is important to first expand the range of motion of the joints through exercises and strengthen the muscles around the joints. Improving aerobic exercise capacity through whole-body exercises can enhance overall functional levels.