If you log in, you can enjoy more benefits. It refers to the ligaments that connect the upper end of the lower thighbone and the lower ends of the shinbone and fibula. Located inside the knee joint are the cruciate ligaments, which consist of the anterior cruciate ligament and the lateral collateral ligament located on the outer part of the joint. The knee, where the upper end of the thighbone meets the lower ends of the shinbone and fibula, is held in place by various ligaments. Inside the joint, there are the anterior cruciate ligament and the posterior cruciate ligament that are cruciate in shape and are located on the inside of the joint. On the outer part of the joint, there is the medial collateral ligament on the inner side of the leg and the lateral collateral ligament on the outer side. The patellar ligament connects the shinbone to the patella at the lower end and is linked to the thighbone by the quadriceps tendon at the top of the patella. The knee ligaments work together with the quadriceps tendon and the patellar tendon to stabilize the knee joint and maintain its stability. When knee ligaments are injured, instability may occur in the anterior-posterior, lateral, and rotational movements. The anterior cruciate ligament prevents the thighbone from shifting forward compared to the shinbone and limits hyperextension and rotation of the shinbone. It is the most commonly injured ligament in the knee. The posterior cruciate ligament supports the shinbone to prevent it from shifting backward compared to the thighbone. The medial collateral ligament prevents the knee from bending outward from the inside, while the lateral collateral ligament prevents the knee from bending inward from the outside. The patellar ligament connects the shinbone to the patella at the lower end. Recently, taping techniques are widely used for knee instability. Taping techniques involve applying tape or bandages to prevent re-injury, for injury prevention, rehabilitation, and to fix and compress the injured area. Taping stimulates the skin and muscles to relax tense muscles, alleviate pain, and stabilize the injured area. It restricts joint movement, provides muscle compression, and strengthens ligaments and tendons. Winter sports like skiing and skating require stability of the hip, knee, and ankle joints. Sudden movements during sports can easily lead to joint injuries. Let's enjoy winter sports by strengthening the stability of the lower limb joints through exercises. 1. One-legged heel raise (Calf muscle training: Gastrocnemius) Stand with one foot on a step and the other foot raised. Support yourself with a handrail or a wall. Repeat lifting and lowering your heel. Caution: Do not raise your heel too high and make sure to support yourself with a stable structure. 2. Toe raise (Quadriceps muscle training: Quadriceps) Stand with your back and buttocks against a wall. Spread your legs shoulder-width apart, stand up, and raise both toes as high as possible. Feel the strain in the quadriceps and repeat slowly. Caution: Be careful not to bend or bring your knees inward. 3. Inner toe raise (Quadriceps, Hamstrings muscles) Lean against the wall with your back and buttocks. Spread your legs shoulder-width apart and raise your inner arches. Caution: Be careful not to bend or bring your knees inward. 4. Half squat (Hips, Hip joints, Knees, Ankles) Lift one leg and hold your waist with both hands. Lean slightly forward, sit back as if on a chair, and bend your knees about 30 degrees and stand. Maintain strength in the abs, waist, hips, thighs, and quadriceps muscles simultaneously. Caution: Do not bend your knees too much beyond the toe line, and perform the exercise slowly.