If you log in, you can take advantage of even more benefits. It is the tenth of the twelve pairs of cranial nerves, an important component of the parasympathetic nervous system that controls unconscious movements of the heart, lungs, adrenal glands, digestive tract, etc. It provides motor parasympathetic nerve fibers from around the neck to part of the colon, involved in regulating skeletal muscle movement, heart rate, gastrointestinal movement coordination, and more. Located in the brainstem, it extends from the thoracic cavity to the abdominal cavity. As the longest and most complexly distributed nerve in the brain, its nerve fibers from the brainstem connect to organs in the thoracic and abdominal cavities (stomach, intestines, lungs). Unlike other cranial nerves, it extends throughout the body. It is called the wandering nerve due to its wide distribution range. Its nerve fibers transmit sensory information and motor impulses from the pharynx, larynx, abdomen, thoracic viscera, regulating blood pressure, some taste perception, digestive and respiratory activities, and regular heart function. In the cervical region, it regulates the larynx and glands in the throat, and in the thoracic area, it influences the digestive system to secrete digestive juices. Especially, as the vagus nerve branches descend around the esophagus, excluding pelvic organs, it distributes to all organs within the abdominal cavity. Vagus nerve stimulation (VNS) is widely used to control epilepsy in patients for whom traditional surgery is deemed unsuitable by utilizing the principle of significantly reducing the frequency and severity of seizures when the vagus nerve is electrically stimulated. After general anesthesia, a VNS electrode is inserted into the left side of the neck, and the device generating electrical stimulation is connected to the left chest wall. The electrical stimulation device is controlled from outside the body via a remote control. Stimulation begins a week after insertion, adjusting to find the most suitable stimulation method for each patient. The stimulation device mainly operates automatically, but can also be manually controlled by the patient when they sense the onset of a seizure. If side effects such as neck pain, hoarseness, or swallowing difficulties occur after electrode insertion, the intensity of the stimulation is reduced. The battery life of the implanted stimulator varies depending on the stimulation method but is generally around 10 years. The Tilt Test is a test commonly performed on patients who have experienced unexplained dizziness or fainting to diagnose vasovagal syncope. The patient lies on a bed and is tilted to a 70-degree angle for 25 minutes to observe blood pressure, heart rate, and electrocardiogram readings.