If you log in, you can enjoy more benefits. There are three semicircular canals located inside our ears, connected to each other, which detect changes in the body's balance and speed. Located in the innermost part of the ear, it exists on both the left and right sides. The vestibular system, responsible for maintaining the body's balance, consists of the vestibular organ and the semicircular canals of the ear. The vestibular organ is made up of two pouches with sensory cells and otoliths, helping to maintain the body's balance and enable proper posture. The semicircular canals are three rings attached above the vestibular organ, filled with lymphatic fluid that moves in any direction causing stimuli to be transmitted to the brain through nerves, detecting rotational movement, direction of movement, and speed. When the head moves, the lymphatic fluid inside the semicircular canals moves in the opposite direction, stimulating sensory cells in the body, allowing the brain to perceive rotational movement. Each semicircular canal can detect a range of vertical or horizontal movements at different angles, perceiving rotational movement in all directions. The sensation of still spinning even after stopping rotation is due to the inertia of the lymphatic fluid, which continues to be perceived by the semicircular canals. If there is debris in the semicircular canals, dizziness may occur. Dizziness can occur suddenly and improve on its own, or worsen when in a specific posture. Debris is a substance around the semicircular canals that helps maintain balance. When debris dislodges from its original position and moves within the semicircular canals, then may attach to a specific area, overstimulating the nerve, causing a sensation of spinning or vertigo. The exact causes of dislodged debris are not clearly understood, but it is known that it can be triggered by external impacts, viral infections, or side effects of medications. Although it can occur at any age, it is more common in people over the age of 40 to 50. Typically, debris-related dizziness improves within a few weeks without any specific treatment, and long-term effects are rare. However, receiving a prompt diagnosis and successful treatment can immediately alleviate symptoms of dizziness, so it is advisable to seek medical examination and treatment at the right time. In cases where hearing loss or unrecoverable damage to the inner ear is present, surgery is difficult as direct access to the cochlear canal is still not possible.