If you log in, you can enjoy even more benefits. It is the lowest part of the leg that supports the floor when a person stands or moves, mainly playing a role related to the movement of our body. It is the part that supports the floor when a person stands at the bottom of the leg. The foot is composed of bones, muscles, tendons, joints, ligaments, nerves, and blood vessels. The foot has a total of 26 bones, which make up 1/4 of all the bones in our body. The bones of the foot can be divided into the hindfoot, midfoot, and forefoot. The heel bone and the foot bone make up the hindfoot. Among them, the heel bone is the largest bone in the hindfoot, responsible for bearing weight and transferring it into the arch. The foot bone helps distribute the weight to the front and back of the foot. The foot is composed of the ankle bone, cuboid bone, and wedge bone. The wedge bone, ankle bone, and arch bone are important elements that make up the inner arch of the foot, while the heel bone and cuboid bone are essential for forming the outer arch. The forefoot consists of five metatarsal bones and 14 toe bones. The foot has a total of 19 muscles and tendons. Movements of the leg and foot are primarily carried out by the anterior muscles, lateral muscles, posterior superficial muscles, and deep posterior muscles. Tendons are the parts connecting bones and muscles. The foot contains the largest tendon in the body, the Achilles tendon, which plays a vital role in movement. As there are many bones in the foot, there are about 30 or more joints. There are 107 ligaments in the foot, which are elastic tissues surrounding the joints, helping maintain and connect the position of the bones during joint movement. Ligaments also supply nutrients to the bones. The foot supports our body when standing and assists in movement when walking or exercising. Additionally, the arch structure of the foot helps alleviate the impact when walking or running. In the inner part of the flat foot, there are four arches, the medial longitudinal arch, lateral longitudinal arch, anterior transverse arch, and middle transverse arch. Based on the shape of these arches, flat feet, normal arches, and high arches can be distinguished. If there is no arch, it can be considered flat feet. Flat feet can cause changes in the alignment of the foot, ankle, leg, pelvis, and spine, making it unstable and susceptible to fatigue and injury. High arches are characterized by a higher arch that does not touch the ground, with a broad area not in contact with the sole, and a high instep. Due to the reduced cushioning capability, high arches can lead to foot pain and the formation of calluses.