If you log in, you can enjoy more benefits. It refers to the front part of the body, from below the chest to above the pelvis. It is located below the ribcage and diaphragm, and above the upper part of the pelvis. The abdomen is divided into four parts to schematically express it, distinguishing between the right upper quadrant (RUQ) where the liver and gallbladder are located, the left upper quadrant (LUQ) where the stomach and spleen are located, the right lower quadrant (RLQ) where the colon and appendix are located, and the left lower quadrant (LLQ) where the small and large intestines are located. It is also divided into 9 regions: the central part around the navel is called the umbilical region, the upper part of the navel is the epigastric region, the lower part of the navel is the pubic region, the outer part near the perineum is the left and right iliac or inguinal region, and the outer part of the navel is the left and right lumbar region. The abdomen contains digestive organs such as the stomach, large and small intestines, liver, bile ducts, and gallbladder, as well as endocrine organs such as the pancreas and adrenal glands, urinary organs such as the kidneys and bladder, and lymphatic organs such as the appendix. The major organs in the abdomen such as the digestive tract, liver, kidneys, and appendix receive blood supply from arteries branching off the aorta. The abdominal aorta branches into the splenic artery, hepatic artery, and renal arteries to supply blood to each organ. The superior mesenteric artery supplies blood to the small and large intestines, while the inferior mesenteric artery supplies blood to the left colon and rectum. Blood absorbed in the small and large intestines is carried up through the inferior mesenteric veins and superior mesenteric veins to form the portal vein. The liver has a unique vascular structure that receives blood from both the hepatic artery branching off the abdominal aorta and the portal vein. Inside the abdomen, there is a thin, transparent membrane called the peritoneum that covers the abdominal organs and walls, creating an internal space called the peritoneal cavity. There is a small amount of peritoneal fluid in the peritoneal cavity. Although the abdomen contains many organs, it is not protected by bones and is only formed by muscles, making it vulnerable to physical impact.