By logging in, you can enjoy more benefits. It supports the trunk with muscles in the abdomen, regulates intra-abdominal pressure to maintain organs in position. It is located in the center of the abdomen. The abdominal muscles consist of 5 muscles vertically located in the center of the abdomen. They are rectus abdominis and transversus abdominis, and the muscles located outside the rectus abdominis are external oblique, internal oblique, and transverse abdominis. The rectus abdominis is located in the center of the abdominal front, extends vertically to the sides from the navel. The external oblique covers the abdominal front from rectus abdominis to the wide back muscle, with its shape forming an oblique shape from the outer to inner side of the body. The internal oblique is thinner and smaller muscle located inside the external oblique. The muscle branches horizontally like the external oblique. The transverse abdominis is a muscle placed horizontally inside the internal oblique on the sides of the abdomen. The abdominal muscles stabilize internal organs and protect them in the trunk. The rectus abdominis function to pull the chest downward and lift the pelvis upward to regulate the pressure inside the abdomen. It also contracts to bend the spine forward. The internal and external obliques work together to rotate the trunk sides and bend it. The external oblique acts when pulling the trunk forward or lifting the pelvis up, while the internal oblique acts when pulling the coccyx down. The rectus abdominis increases intra-abdominal pressure to exhale. Building toned abs as you age, the expanding waist size is a signal of health. Control your food intake, engage in moderate aerobic exercise, and daily abdominal strengthening exercises for a slim waist and great abs. 1. Lie down with arms outstretched and touch your ankles. Apply force to the abdomen and lift the upper body so that the fingertips touch the ankles. Breathe naturally, exhaling when lifting the upper body. 2. Lie down, raise your knees. Bring both legs together, lift them up and make the knees perpendicular. Engage the abdomen and lift the knees toward the chest. Lift quickly until the hips rise, then lower slowly. 3. Rotate knees left/right. Lift both legs together and make the knees perpendicular. Place both arms on the ground and rotate the knees left and right alternately. Rotate the knees only to the maximum range. Focus on the oblique muscles. 4. Plank exercise. Lie down, elbows at a 90-degree angle. Support with toes and lift the abdomen and waist towards the sky. Maintain strong force in the waist and abdominal muscles to align shoulders to heels in a diagonal line. *It's good to do 8-10 reps of each exercise for 3-5 sets. Do not hold your breath during the exercises, and increase repetitions or sets as your strength improves. To relieve muscle fatigue after exercising, consume carbohydrates spent by the body during exercise and rest. Taking a bath, massage, etc., helps promote recovery from fatigue by improving blood circulation, allowing contracted muscles to relax, reducing muscle fatigue.