If you log in, you can enjoy a variety of benefits. The autonomic nervous system is one of the autonomic parts that stores energy in advance to prepare for emergencies. It originates from the spinal cord from the midbrain to the medulla, from the second thoracic vertebra to the fourth thoracic vertebra, and regulates the overall internal organs, most blood vessels, myocardium, smooth muscles, glands, pelvic organs, etc. The nerve fibers of the sympathetic nervous system start from the brainstem and thoracic region of the spinal cord and extend to the motor neurons or organs they influence, forming synapses around the effector organs. The sympathetic nervous system is a nerve that functions in a relaxed situation without stress. It minimizes the body's energy use as much as possible to conserve energy, and is responsible for essential functions of the body such as digestion and excretion. The sympathetic nervous system regulates blood pressure, heart rate, and respiratory rate to lower than normal, increase gastrointestinal activity, warm the skin, contract the pupils to protect the eyes, and regulate the ciliary body for better vision. The parasympathetic nervous system, through antagonistic action, maintains the dynamic balance of the body responding to the external environment. In particular, the parasympathetic nervous system responds more rapidly to changes than the sympathetic nervous system, alerting and regulating changes in the body's health status first. It is sensitive to respiratory and cardiac damage. If the parasympathetic nervous system is overactive, it can cause lethargy, depression, difficulty in distinguishing objects in dark places due to lack of pupil dilation, and it is responsible for inhibiting sweating; when this nerve is overactive, temperature regulation becomes difficult. When lying down and getting up, if the sympathetic nervous system cannot raise blood pressure, orthostatic hypotension may occur, and overstimulation of intestinal and bladder activity may lead to irritable bowel syndrome and overactive bladder symptoms. The autonomic nervous system regulates the function of internal organs according to the internal and external environmental conditions of the body, maintaining homeostasis. Modern people live in a stressful environment, so various abnormalities occur in the autonomic nervous system for many reasons, and these can accumulate, weaken the immune system, and lead to diseases. In the following cases, you should consider whether the balance between the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems is disrupted. Digestion is poor, feeling bloated and gassy. Having trouble sleeping at night and not achieving deep sleep. Headaches with a little stress. Swelling in hands, feet, and face, and always feeling tired. Decreased attention, concentration, and frequent mistakes. Feeling irritable, inexplicably sad, or anxious. In such cases, it is necessary to stabilize the autonomic nervous system through sufficient rest and regular exercise.