If you log in, you can enjoy more benefits. The adrenal gland is an organ that produces and secretes steroid hormones on the outside of the kidney. The adrenal gland is located in the upper part of the kidney, and the adrenal cortex represents the outer layer of the adrenal gland. It accounts for 90% of the adrenal gland and is composed of ancestral tissue surrounding the medulla. The adrenal cortex is composed of three layers, including the zona glomerulosa, zona fasciculata, and zona reticularis from the outermost layer. It produces steroid hormones such as cortisol, aldosterone, and androgens by receiving stimulation from adrenocorticotropic hormone secreted from the pituitary gland. Aldosterone: A mineralocorticoid synthesized in the outermost layer of the adrenal cortex called the zona glomerulosa. It regulates the balance of fluid and electrolytes in the body through the concentration of sodium and potassium. Cortisol: A glucocorticoid synthesized in the middle layer of the adrenal cortex called the zona fasciculata. It includes cortisone and cortisol, which regulate the body's stress response by enhancing metabolism and increasing blood sugar levels to help the body resist stress factors. It functions to increase blood sugar levels by breaking down fats and proteins into glucose when the concentration of glucocorticoids in the blood increases. It also has anti-inflammatory, anti-edema, and pain-reducing effects. Androgens, Estrogens: Sex hormones produced in the innermost layer of the adrenal cortex called the zona reticularis. They are continuously produced in small amounts throughout life. Steroids, which are components of adrenal cortex hormones, are administered locally on the cornea to minimize systemic side effects and are used to treat allergic rhinitis and administer joint injections for patients with rheumatoid arthritis for immune suppression and anti-inflammatory effects. Adrenal cortex hormone drugs store glucose, help break down proteins and fats, and have functions such as immune suppression and anti-inflammatory effects related to the body's metabolism. Although they are important hormones for the body, using large amounts or using them indiscriminately can lead to serious side effects. Possible side effects include moon-shaped face, gastrointestinal disorders, osteoporosis, exacerbation of infections, aseptic bone necrosis, and weight gain, so be sure to consult with medical professionals about taking them.