If you log in, you can enjoy even more benefits. The peroneal artery, also known as the calf artery, branches off from the posterior tibial artery and supplies blood to the outer side of the leg. It extends from just below the knee to the ankle. Located in the upper part of the leg, it branches off from the posterior tibial artery just below the knee. Above the calf artery are the tibial artery, anterior tibial artery, fibular artery, dorsalis pedis artery, and arteries on the outer side of the foot sequentially connected. As the calf artery descends along with thin veins in the lower part of the leg, it continues deep beneath the skin. Branches connected to the calf artery communicate with the tibial artery, penetrate the anterior fibular artery, and connect to the middle metatarsal bone of the foot. Arteries are blood vessels through which blood flows from the heart, characterized by strong elasticity and thicker walls than veins to withstand the pressure from the heart. It supplies blood to the outer side of the leg. When blood clots in blood vessels, it leads to thrombosis, and when atherosclerotic plaques flow with the bloodstream and block arteries or arterioles, it causes arterial embolism. If embolism flows into the arterial blood vessel, it can partially or completely block blood flow, preventing blood, oxygen, and nutrients from being supplied to the tissues or organs. The severity of the disease varies depending on the size of the embolism and how much it blocks the vessels. When thrombosis occurs in the peroneal artery, symptoms such as pain at the blocked vessel site, cooling of the skin, numbness, tingling sensation, and muscle cramps may occur. The disease can be diagnosed using vascular ultrasound, angiography, and treatment involves using anticoagulants, antiplatelet agents, and thrombolytic agents to dissolve and prevent embolism. Symptoms and treatments vary depending on the severity and presentation of the disease, so if you experience unusual sensations in the calf, it is advisable to visit a hospital and undergo examination.