Logging in will allow you to enjoy even more benefits. The splenic artery arises from the celiac trunk and extends from the upper part of the pancreas to the tail of the pancreas, supplying blood to the spleen. It runs horizontally from the celiac trunk to the spleen. There is a main blood vessel connecting the celiac trunk to the spleen. There is a short branch artery that supplies blood to the upper part of the stomach, and the left gastric artery branches off downwards along the left side of the stomach. The splenic artery carries blood that enters through the entrance of the spleen to the splenic vein, which then enters the white pulp of the lymphoid nodule. Arteries passing through this white pulp are called central arterioles, which branch out into capillaries made of endothelial cells in the red pulp, leading to venule connections. The splenic vein exiting through the splenic gates passes through the portal vein, an important vein in the abdomen, to enter the liver. Blood flow to the spleen from the splenic artery flows at a speed of about 150mL/min to the central artery. Some of the blood flowing through the splenic artery flows out of the spleen through arterioles and capillaries, while most of the remaining blood flows through venous sinuses and cords. Blood entering the cords returns to circulation through the splenic venules, but blood entering the cords is different. Red blood cells that are damaged or aged remain in the cords to be destroyed for recycling purposes. Abnormal red blood cells such as parasites, nuclear remnants, and denatured hemoglobin pass through the cords and are filtered out as they return to the spleen's circulation. Due to this process, the time it takes for blood to pass through the spleen is slightly slower than in other organs. Patients with hepatic cirrhosis have impaired liver tissue, making the progress of blood flow through the vessels entering the liver difficult. Consequently, secondary dysfunction of the spleen occurs, leading to a decrease in platelet count and bleeding symptoms. In order to improve the bleeding tendency, surgery to remove the spleen is performed. However, general anesthesia in cirrhotic patients can be risky, so alternatively, partial splenic embolization may be performed.