If you log in, you can enjoy even more benefits. The periosteum is a dense fibrous membrane that covers the surface of bones. The periosteum is rich in blood vessels, lymphatic vessels, and sensory nerves, and blood vessels that supply blood to the bones pass through the periosteum. The periosteum contains osteoprogenitor cells related to bone formation, which play a role in bone growth and in attaching bones together in case of fractures. It is located on the outer surface of all bones except for areas covered by cartilage, ligaments, or tendons where muscles attach. The periosteum is composed of two layers, which are distinguished as the outer fibrous layer and inner cellular layer of the periosteum. The outer layer is a thick fibrous layer composed of collagen. It contains nerve fibers for sensation of pain, and abundant blood vessels that supply blood to the bone cells inside the bones. It is also a site for muscle attachment. The inner fibrous tissue of the periosteum connects to the bone through Sharpey's fibers, combining blood vessels and the periosteum. In fetuses and infants, the periosteum is thicker and bone adhesions are less, making it easier for the bone and periosteum to separate in case of fractures compared to adults. Conversely, in children, new bones form quickly and bone unions in fractures happen rapidly. As one becomes an adult, the number of bone cells decreases but their function does not decrease. 
The periosteum of the skull (cranium) is adjacent to the meninges, a protective membrane of the brain, different from other parts of bone periosteum. The bone cells located in the inner layer of the bone lifelong participate in the formation and remodeling of bones, while the periosteum from the outer layer extends into the bone to attach and protect the bone. If the bone is injured, bone cells rapidly multiply to reshape the damaged bone site, and in case of fractures, the blood clotting formed by bleeding and the proliferated bone cells form a thick cellular layer to rebuild the bone. 
Periostitis refers to instances where the periosteum is damaged due to swelling, abnormal growth, bleeding, or inflammation caused by suppurative infection around the periosteum. It can occur in any part of the periosteum, but mainly occurs in the tibia, often induced by repetitive use and impact. It is more likely to develop with an increase in the frequency, intensity, and duration of sudden tibia usage. Pain and swelling occur on the inner lower part of the shin, and bending the toes or ankles downward worsens the pain. If one rests and does not use the affected bone, the pain subsides, but running or jumping can cause the pain to return. Treatment involves stopping actions that trigger symptoms based on the cause of the condition. If symptoms persist chronically, the recovery period may be longer and surgery may be necessary, so prompt treatment is needed if a condition is suspected.