If you log in, you can enjoy more benefits. The nephron is a small cluster of tiny blood vessels bunched together like a ball of yarn inside the kidney, forming the basic functional unit of the kidney along with the renal corpuscle. It is the part where waste products in the blood are filtered out. It is located in the outer cortex (cortex) of the kidney. It consists of three layers of blood vessels, including endothelial cells, basement membrane, and epithelial cells. It has a diameter of about 0.1 to 0.2mm, and the afferent arterioles that enter the glomerulus have a larger diameter than the efferent arterioles that exit the glomerulus to maintain high pressure inside the glomerulus. The basic function of the glomerulus is to filter substances in the blood. Blood entering the kidney through the renal artery passes through a cluster of thin capillaries called the glomerulus, where water, electrolytes, and various waste products are secreted into the Bowman's capsule. Large particles of proteins and red blood cells in the blood cannot pass through the glomerulus, so some of the plasma components are pushed from the glomerulus to the Bowman's capsule by hydrostatic pressure, transporting substances in a method where small molecules such as inorganic ions, amino acids, glucose, nutrients, and water are filtered while large molecules such as red blood cells, proteins, and fats cannot be filtered. Therefore, normal urine does not contain components such as proteins or red blood cells. Filtered substances move through the thin and long tubules called nephrons connected to the Bowman's capsule. If the filtration holes in any part of the glomerular capillaries become blocked or enlarged, filtration disorders may occur, leading to a buildup of waste products in the blood or causing proteinuria or hematuria. Only 20% of the blood passing through the glomerulus exits through the Bowman's capsule for excretion as urine, with the remaining 80% exiting through the efferent arterioles. The Glomerular Filtration Rate (GFR) refers to the amount of blood that the kidneys filter clean in one minute. The normal GFR is about 90-120mL per minute. In a healthy adult kidney, about 200 liters of blood are filtered and 2 liters of urine are produced daily. This test can evaluate kidney function and is usually performed when there is a risk of kidney damage or related symptoms occur.