If you log in, you can enjoy even more benefits. Located between the right atrium and right ventricle, a septal leaflet plays a role in preventing the backflow of blood from the right ventricle to the right atrium. It is positioned between the right atrium and right ventricle. It is a septum leaflet that exists between the right atrium and right ventricle, and the leaflet opens and closes due to the movement of three leaflets like doors. The tricuspid valve only opens in one direction, allowing blood to flow from the right atrium to the right ventricle. The chordae tendineae connect to the leaflets, allowing the leaflets to move. There are papillary muscles between the chordae tendineae and the leaflets to prevent the leaflet from pushing into the right atrium and to maintain its position. The heart needs valves to prevent blood from flowing back as it fills in diastole and ejects blood in systole in a specific direction. These valves function to prevent the backflow of blood and regulate blood flow sequentially. The tricuspid valve regulates blood flow between the right atrium and right ventricle. Deoxygenated blood returning from the body's organs is collected in the right atrium through the superior and inferior vena cava. When the right atrium contracts to expel blood, the tricuspid valve opens and blood moves to the right ventricle, and when the right ventricle contracts, the valve closes to prevent blood from flowing back to the right atrium. As the right ventricle contracts, blood flows into the pulmonary artery and returns oxygenated blood from the lungs. Positioned between the atria and ventricles, the heart valves completely separate them, and each valve has a structure that opens or closes as the papillary muscles and chordae tendineae relax or contract. If there are problems with heart valves, it can affect the overall blood flow in the heart, having serious consequences on the body. While heart murmurs are undoubtedly important clues to heart disease, the severity of heart disease and the intensity of heart murmurs do not always correlate. As a result of the misconception that louder heart murmurs mean worse heart disease, there are cases where groundless worries about simple heart defects persist or unnecessary tests are frequently conducted, and sometimes, unfortunately, serious congenital heart diseases such as complete atrioventricular septal defect accompanied by complete transposition of the great arteries, pulmonary venous return anomalies, pulmonary valve atresia, aortic interruption, severe stenosis, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, dilated cardiomyopathy, or serious supravalvular pulmonary hypertension. There may be rare cases where the diagnosis is missed. It can be dangerous to judge the severity of a disease solely based on the presence and size of heart murmurs, so it is important to have a correct understanding of heart murmurs. The presence and intensity of heart murmurs are influenced by various complex factors, so it is more desirable for patients or their caregivers to focus not only on whether heart murmurs are present or how strongly they are but also to leave the comprehensive judgment of a cardiac specialist regarding treatment methods, prognosis, and future course.