Logging in will allow you to enjoy more benefits. The part of the female reproductive system that can be seen from the outside around the female perineum. It is located at the lower part of the pelvis and is external to the vaginal structure of the female reproductive system. Mons pubis: The fatty rounded area in front of the pubic symphysis that is covered by pubic hair. Pubic hair: The rough and curly hair that covers the mons pubis, develops during puberty. Labia majora: Two oval skin folds located just below the mons pubis that cover the cleft of the external genitalia and have numerous sebaceous glands, sweat glands, and hair follicles on the outer surface. Labia minora: Appears where the two labia majora separate, with the urethral meatus in front and the vaginal opening in the back. Vaginal opening: Partially covered by the hymen, if the hymen is torn, remnants may remain. Clitoris: A small, hooded protrusion located just in front of the vaginal opening and below the pubic bone joint. Urethral meatus: Located between the clitoris and vaginal opening. Skene's glands: Open either at the middle or back of the urethral meatus. Bartholin's glands: Two glands located below the vagina. Hymen: Thin, mucous membrane with blood vessels that separates the vagina from the vestibule and covers the entrance. Perineum: The diamond-shaped area from the front of the vulva to the back of the anus. The female reproductive system differs from the male's as it is divided into internal (ovaries, uterus, vagina) responsible for reproductive functions, and external (urination, menstruation, sexual intercourse) which includes childbirth via the vaginal canal during natural delivery. The clitoris swells with blood upon sexual arousal, but unlike the male penis, it does not have a similar function in reproduction. Bartholin's glands secrete fluid upon sexual arousal, aiding in lubrication. Proper hygiene is important due to the proximity of the female reproductive system to the anus. Wiping front to back after urination or bowel movements, avoiding tight-fitting clothes, and conducting regular self-exams of the external genitalia to detect any abnormalities are crucial. Notify a physician if you notice black spots, lumps, changes in skin color, ulcers, or sores during self-examination.