If you log in, you can enjoy a wider range of benefits. One of the pathways that the air coming in through the nose and mouth goes through on its way into the lung alveoli is the bronchial tubes, which are the small branches of the bronchi. The bronchial tubes function to deliver air to the lung alveoli by connecting to them. They are located in the chest area and are part of both lungs. They extend to the ends of the bronchi and connect to the lung alveoli. The airway participating in respiration is divided into the upper airway and lower airway. The upper airway consists of the nose, nasal cavity, oral cavity, sinuses, larynx, and pharynx, while the lower airway consists of the trachea, bronchi, bronchioles, and alveoli. When air enters through the upper airway, it passes through the trachea and connects to the right and left bronchi, leading to respiratory bronchioles, alveolar ducts, and alveolar sacs. The bronchioles gradually become thinner, with the respiratory bronchioles being the most distal portion of the bronchial tree. The respiratory bronchioles branch off from the bronchi, forming the ultimate portion with a diameter of less than 1mm, and there are approximately 3 million respiratory bronchioles. The ends of the respiratory bronchioles connect to grape-like alveoli, with 50-100 alveoli connected to each respiratory bronchiole. The respiratory bronchioles have mucous membranes inside, and the surrounding smooth muscles spiral around them, providing elasticity to the bronchioles. The respiratory bronchioles connect the alveolar clusters at the ends of the bronchi and play a role in delivering air to each alveolus. The surfactant produced by the alveoli flows into the respiratory bronchioles, protecting the airway by removing foreign substances through the phagocytic action of macrophages. Foreign substances that were not filtered out in earlier stages before the respiratory bronchioles, such as fine dust, asbestos, silica, accumulate inside the respiratory bronchioles, causing respiratory diseases. When foreign substances accumulate inside the bronchi, air circulation is hindered, causing shortness of breath and a darkening of the face. These conditions often occur in people exposed to sunlight or engaged in quarrying. In severe cases, it can even lead to lung cancer, so it is important to prevent the accumulation of foreign substances in the bronchi. Initially, the most important thing is to avoid exposure to fine particles that can accumulate in the lungs. If exposure cannot be avoided, ventilate the area immediately and remove dust. If it is inevitable to be exposed to foreign substances, minimize the exposed areas of the body and wear a mask that can filter out fine particles. Drink water frequently, use an air purifier, and regulate indoor humidity. If you have asthma or chronic respiratory diseases, always carry a bronchodilator to use in case of emergencies.