Logging in will allow you to enjoy even more benefits. The five sections separated by the lines in your fingertips are responsible for the fine movements of your hands. They are located at the tips of your fingers. While most of the important organs in the body are protected by bones, the fingers have their bones positioned on the innermost side with nerves, blood vessels, muscles, and tendons distributed around them. The bones of the fingers are connected by tendons and joints, and there are tiny nerves at the tips of the fingers that allow you to sense touch. Each finger has separate tendons, ligaments, and muscles that control their movements, and as you move towards the fingertips, the blood vessels become thinner, supplying nutrients and regulating body temperature to the fingers. Additionally, at the tips of the fingers are hard, square-shaped plates called fingernails. The fingers consist of five digits located at the ends of the hands, named in order of proximity to the torso as the thumb, index finger, middle finger, ring finger, and little finger. The bones of the fingers are called the phalanges, named in proximity to the hand as the proximal phalanx, middle phalanx, and distal phalanx. Each bone is connected by joints and ligaments, allowing movements such as bending, straightening, spreading, contracting, and rotating the joints of the fingers. When you spread and straighten your fingers simultaneously, your hand takes on a fan shape, and when you contract and bend, you are able to make a fist. In particular, the thumb is composed of the proximal and distal phalanges, unlike the other fingers, and can perform functions such as gripping and pinching in conjunction with the movements of other fingers. Joints in the fingers can also develop degenerative arthritis, which occurs as a result of prolonged use of the fingers, causing inflammation and pain due to damage to the joint cartilage, muscles, and ligaments. Treatment is based on reducing inflammation and pain, and therapy may involve medication and exercise to manage the disease. When severe finger deformities occur, surgical intervention may be necessary. If you experience numbness in your hands, it could be a symptom of various conditions. Many people mistakenly attribute it to peripheral vascular disorders, but this condition is more commonly associated with finger pain than numbness, where the fingertips turn white when exposed to cold due to poor blood supply, although it is not very common. It is often associated with carpal tunnel syndrome, which is more common in middle-aged women and occurs in both hands, particularly during driving or at night. If numbness persists and muscle atrophy develops, causing loss of function in the thumb, seeking medical attention is advised. If a finger is severed, it is important to handle the severed finger properly until you can get to a hospital. Wrap the severed finger in a damp cloth or towel, seal it in a plastic bag, then place it in a bag filled with ice and promptly take it to the hospital. Avoid direct contact of the severed finger with ice or water, as it can cause damage to blood vessels or tissues. If kept at room temperature, reattachment of the finger within 6-12 hours increases the likelihood of recovery, whereas if stored at a cold temperature, there is a chance of recovery within 12-24 hours.