By logging in, you can enjoy even more benefits. It forms a concave hollow in the direction of the palm of the wrist bone, located between the wrist bones at the edges on both sides, a tunnel made of fibrous tissue. Muscles and tendons that bend the fingers, tendons, and the median nerve responsible for the sensation of the hand pass through this tunnel. Located on the palm side of both wrists. Muscles, tendons, nerves, and blood vessels pass through a narrow passageway called the wrist tunnel at the center of the wrist. The wrist tunnel is an oval-shaped membrane surrounded by wrist bones and ligaments, covering the outer part of many structures passing through the wrist. In the back of the hand, many structures spread widely into the back of the hand, while in the palm area, the structural elements of the wrist bones are densely packed and pass through the wrist tunnel. Therefore, if the wrist tunnel narrows for various reasons, symptoms such as hand numbness may occur when bending the wrist and compressing the nerve. The carpal tunnel protects the muscles, tendons, nerves, and blood vessels that are involved in the function of the hand between the wrist bones. In particular, tendons passing through the wrist tunnel are surrounded by a thin membrane to help them function smoothly within the wrist tunnel. If inflammation occurs in the tendons, damage to the surrounding membrane may compress the nearby nerves, causing discomfort in the wrist. Many structures pass through the wrist tunnel, among which the muscles and tendons are responsible for moving the fingers, and the median nerve is responsible for the sensation and movement functions of the fingers. There are also blood vessels that supply blood to the hand. The most harmful thing to the carpal tunnel is incorrect posture, so it is most important to correct it. Avoid working with the wrists bent for long periods of time, and regularly stretch the wrists to relieve tension. If the position of the wrist when using a mouse or keyboard is low, the carpal tunnel may be compressed, so position the object being used by the wrist in alignment with the wrist.