If you log in, you can enjoy more benefits. The lens inside the eye, which is convex on both sides, is called the crystalline lens. It gathers light to focus it on the retina, and the thickness and curvature of the crystalline lens are adjusted to focus. Located inside the eye, behind the iris and in front of the vitreous body is the crystalline lens. The crystalline lens is a convex transparent tissue on both sides and is connected to the ciliary body by a fibrous membrane above and below. The front part between the crystalline lens and the cornea is called the anterior chamber, filled with aqueous humor, while the back is filled with vitreous humor. A condition where the crystalline lens becomes opaque is called cataracts. The main function of the crystalline lens is to refract light entering the eye to focus it on the retina. Light entering the eye passes through the cornea and crystalline lens, refracting to focus on the retina at the back of the eye. About 2/3 of the total refraction is done by the cornea, while the remaining 1/3 is done by the crystalline lens, which usually does not change the curvature of its back but changes the curvature of the front. By changing the thickness and curvature of the crystalline lens, one can see clearly objects at different distances and focus the eyes. To focus clearly, the ciliary body and the fibrous membrane connected to the crystalline lens move to adjust the thickness of the crystalline lens. When the ciliary body relaxes, the fibrous membrane contracts, making the crystalline lens thinner, allowing you to see distant objects. When the ciliary body contracts, the fibrous membrane extends, making the crystalline lens convex, allowing you to see nearby objects. This adjusting ability declines with age, making it difficult to see nearby objects, known as presbyopia. If there is a problem with the focusing ability of the crystalline lens, myopia occurs, causing objects to appear blurry in front of the retina. When the refractive power of the cornea or crystalline lens is too strong, causing objects to focus in front of the retina, it is called refractive myopia. If the internal length of the eye is too long and doesn't focus on the retina, it is called axial myopia. The anterior chamber in front of the crystalline lens maintains the proper shape of the cornea and regulates intraocular pressure while providing nutrients to the avascular crystalline lens and cornea. If the ligaments supporting the crystalline lens are damaged or weakened, it may dislocate. Congenitally weak ligaments or external trauma, like getting hit by a baseball, can cause dislocation of the crystalline lens. Over half of patients with Marfan syndrome are reported to experience crystalline lens dislocation. When the crystalline lens is dislocated, vision becomes blurry in proportion to the degree of dislocation, and symptoms may not appear if partially dislocated. In most cases, dislocation is not treated, and glasses are worn to correct blurred vision. Regular check-ups are necessary to monitor the degree of dislocation, and if it causes other diseases or damage, surgical replacement of the crystalline lens with an artificial one may be necessary.