If you log in, you can enjoy more benefits. It is a septum between the left atrium and left ventricle of the heart. It is located between the left atrium and left ventricle. The septum between the left atrium and left ventricle consists of two leaflets like a door, and the movement of the leaflets opens and closes the septum. The mitral valve only opens in one direction, allowing blood to flow from the left atrium to the left ventricle. The chordae tendineae connect to the leaflets to allow them to move. The trabeculae are present between the chordae tendineae and leaflets to prevent the septum from shifting toward the left atrium and maintain its position. In particular, the mitral valve has a thick and strong structure to withstand the high pressure in the left ventricle. The heart needs septa to prevent backflow of blood after filling in the diastole so that the blood can be ejected in a specific direction during systole. These septa primarily prevent blood from backflowing and regulate the sequential flow of blood. The mitral valve regulates the flow of blood between the left atrium and left ventricle. When oxygen-rich blood enters the left atrium through the pulmonary veins and the left atrium contracts, the mitral valve opens. When a large amount of blood is pumped out to the body, the mitral valve closes to prevent backflow to the left atrium, and blood is ejected from the left ventricle under high pressure. Oxygen-rich blood leaving the left ventricle travels through the aorta to supply oxygen to various organs in the body. The septum is positioned between the atrium and ventricle to completely separate them, and each septum has trabeculae and chordae tendineae that open or close the septum as they relax or contract. If there is a problem with the heart septum, it can affect the overall blood flow in the heart and have serious consequences for the body. Although heart murmurs are undoubtedly important clues to heart disease, the severity of heart disease does not always correlate with the intensity of heart murmurs. Misunderstandings that larger heart murmurs always indicate severe heart disease can lead to unnecessary worries, frequent unnecessary tests, and sometimes even missing the diagnosis of very serious congenital heart diseases. It is important to have a correct understanding of heart murmurs because judging the severity of a disease based solely on the presence and size of a heart murmur can be risky. The presence and intensity of heart murmurs involve multiple complex factors, so patients and caregivers should focus not only on whether heart murmurs are present or how loud they are but also leave the comprehensive judgment of a cardiac specialist about treatment methods, prognosis, and future course.