If you log in, you can enjoy more benefits. It plays a role in helping blood flow evenly inside the heart. The heart valves are composed of the tricuspid valve, pulmonary valve, mitral valve, and aortic valve. The heart valves are located inside the heart. ▶ Tricuspid valve: between the right atrium and right ventricle ▶ Pulmonary valve: between the right ventricle and pulmonary artery ▶ Mitral valve: between the left atrium and left ventricle ▶ Aortic valve: between the left ventricle and aorta. While the tricuspid, pulmonary, and aortic valves are composed of three leaflets, the mitral valve is composed of two leaflets. The tricuspid and mitral valves have chordae tendineae and papillary muscles that support the structure underneath the valve, but the aortic and pulmonary valves do not have this structure. They help blood flow smoothly without backflow during circulation inside the heart. The tricuspid valve is located between the right atrium and right ventricle to prevent blood backflow from the right ventricle to the right atrium. The pulmonary valve is located between the right ventricle and pulmonary artery to prevent blood backflow. The mitral valve is located between the left atrium and left ventricle to prevent blood backflow from the left ventricle to the left atrium. The aortic valve is located between the left ventricle and the aorta to prevent blood backflow. If there is a problem with opening and closing the valves, valve disorders can occur. Restenosis occurs when the valve does not open properly in time, and regurgitation occurs when the valve does not close properly, causing blood to flow back. When a valve disorder occurs, drug therapy to reduce the burden on the heart and improve symptoms can be performed, but this is not a fundamental treatment for symptom relief, so surgical treatment may be necessary. There are two types of heart valve surgery: valve repair surgery to preserve one's valve and valve replacement surgery with an artificial valve.