Logging in will give you access to even more benefits. The Achilles tendon is a strong tendon located at the back of the heel, connecting the calf muscles to the bones of the heel, allowing you to flex or jump with your foot. It plays a crucial role when you push your foot to the ground, especially when starting to walk or jumping high up. It is located directly above the heels of both feet. The Achilles tendon, which appears as the calf muscles bulge downwards, connects to the back of the heel bone (calcaneus) and thickens under the skin. It supports the weight of our body, allowing us to support our feet on the ground and walk or jump. When you bend your knee inward, the calf muscles behind (gastrocnemius) contract and pull the Achilles tendon, and when you move your ankle downwards, the Achilles tendon contracts, causing the calf muscles at the back of the leg to contract. The Achilles tendon, being a part of the body that bears a lot of weight, can be injured if constantly subjected to repetitive impacts. Neglecting to treat it can lead to chronic inflammation and even rupture of the Achilles tendon. Wearing shoes without enough cushioning can cause problems in the entire foot. In order to reduce pressure on the Achilles tendon, it is recommended to wear shoes with heels about 12mm higher than the front of the foot and with flexible insteps. If the shoe structure presses on the Achilles tendon, insert a pad to reduce friction and irritation. There are exercises that can help alleviate the pain in the Achilles tendon. One simple and common method is to raise and lower the heel, standing on a step or a platform 15-20cm higher than the ground, lifting the heel towards the end of the front of the foot and then lowering it down. Repeat this exercise, lifting the heel for 1 second and lowering it for 1 second. Above all, the most important thing to relieve Achilles tendon pain is to practice proper walking that reduces the impact on the foot, thus reducing the burden on the Achilles tendon.