If you log in, you can take advantage of even more benefits. The eye is a round structure in the eye, surrounded by a socket on the inside and covered by eyelids on the outside. It is located in the eye socket in the area of both eyes. An adult eye size is approximately 24mm and consists of three layers - the outer layer, middle layer, inner layer, and the contents of the eye. The outer layer is the outermost layer of the eye with no blood vessels, It consists of a transparent cornea and an opaque white sclera, which maintain the shape of the eye. The middle layer, also called the choroid, is located in the middle of the eye and supplies nutrients and oxygen to the retina which is rich in blood vessels. It includes the iris, ciliary body, and choroid. The inner layer is the innermost layer of the eye, also called the retina. The retina is a neural tissue that plays an important role in vision, detecting light through photoreceptor cells in the retina. The macula, a part of the retina directly exposed to light, receives light most sensitively and is connected to the brain through the optic nerve. The optic nerve has a blind spot where light cannot be detected. The eye works with surrounding structures outside the eye to collect visual information and transmit it to the brain. Maintaining the round shape of the eye with three layers, the eye moves in the correct direction with the surrounding eye muscles. The cornea receives external light and regulates light entering the eye through the actions of the iris and ciliary body. The cornea, ciliary body, and lens focus external images accurately on the retina, which then transmits the visual information to the brain through the optic nerve. The thin tear film that washes away bacteria or dust and acts as a lubricant covers the surface of our eyes. If any of the components that make up the tear film are abnormal, the eyes may feel dry, easily congested, and have a foreign body sensation, which is called dry eye syndrome. The causes of dry eye syndrome are diverse, but recently, it is occurring more often in people who spend long hours using computers or smartphones. When focusing on a monitor or cell phone screen for a long time, the frequency of blinking unconsciously decreases, which can lead to eye fatigue and dryness. Therefore, intentionally blinking your eyes while using the computer can be helpful, and if you still feel discomfort, using artificial tears can be helpful. If you frequently use artificial tears, it is best to use single-dose packages without preservatives, and if not, using artificial tears in a bottle is also acceptable. Dry eye syndrome is more likely to occur in winter when heating devices such as heaters and electric heaters are used frequently. To prevent and relieve symptoms, maintaining the appropriate indoor temperature and ventilating every 2-3 hours and using a damp towel to prevent indoor dryness can be helpful. To maintain eye health, use books, TV, and computers in moderate brightness and take breaks for your eyes. When your eyes feel tired, perform eye exercises and stretching. Consume adequate fluids and foods containing vitamin A, beta-carotene, egg yolks, and green and yellow vegetables that are beneficial for eye health. Avoid alcohol, smoking, and try to reduce stress. If your eyesight deteriorates during adolescence and requires correction, it is recommended to correct it with glasses or contact lenses. Contact lenses have an optical advantage over glasses as they provide a broader field of vision and less distortion of objects. However, if the proper usage method is not followed, it can cause eye congestion and inflammation, so be cautious. Wearing contact lenses for a long period is also not ideal, and if any side effects occur, discontinue use immediately and seek medical advice. In terms of safety, glasses are the best option, but if you choose to use contact lenses, make sure to follow the instructions carefully.