If you log in, you can enjoy even more benefits. Inside the amnion, which covers the embryo, there is a fluid called amniotic fluid. This fluid expands the amnion to form a pocket called the amniotic sac, creating an environment in which the embryo can grow and be protected. It covers the outer part of the embryo inside the uterus. When the fertilized egg is implanted in the uterus, the cells of the embryo elongate towards the mother's body. The embryo is made up of various components, creating empty spaces between the layers called the amniotic cavity. This cavity is filled with amniotic fluid, which is a fluid substance made by the mother. The amniotic fluid suspends the embryo, providing a cushion against physical harm. The outer part of the embryo forms a thin amnion that surrounds the entire embryo, preventing loss of amniotic fluid and connecting the internal tissues. The amniotic fluid inside is a liquid part of the mother's blood, filled with urine, amnion, placenta, and cells from the fetus. Labor pains during childbirth occur when the fetus compresses the amnion, leading the amniotic fluid to break. The amnion plays a protective role by surrounding the embryo, while the amniotic fluid inside absorbs external impacts and maintains a constant temperature within the amniotic sac. When the amniotic sac ruptures, the amniotic fluid that was inside flows out through the cervix and vagina. Amniotic rupture usually occurs towards the end of the first stage of labor, and if the amniotic sac ruptures before labor begins, it is referred to as premature rupture of membranes. The amount of amniotic fluid leaking varies from person to person. In cases of low amniotic fluid, using pads can help prevent infection. If a large amount of amniotic fluid leaks out, it is important to use a clean towel and visit a hospital as soon as possible for medical attention. The decision to give birth is based on the condition of the fetus and the mother, the gestational age, and other factors. The longer the period between the amniotic rupture and childbirth, the higher the risk. Even if there are no signs of infection, continuous monitoring is necessary, so it is important to consult with healthcare professionals. Amniotic fluid testing involves collecting cells that have detached from the amnion, culturing them, and analyzing the chromosomes. The amniotic sac contains the same genetic material as the fetus, allowing for the identification of fetal disorders, and determining the maturity of the lungs based on specific components that appear during the development of the fetus' lungs. The amniotic sac, which protects the fetus from external impacts, loses its function after childbirth. However, it can be used for medical purposes in other areas, such as ophthalmology, mainly for conditions like conjunctival or corneal diseases. It can also be temporarily transplanted to reduce pain and promote tissue regeneration, and can be used in stem cell cultivation. The amniotic sac contains factors that promote regeneration, making it useful in various fields such as conjunctiva, cornea, and burned skin. During pregnancy, all expectant mothers can confirm the state of pregnancy through blood tests and ultrasounds, and determine the presence of congenital genetic disorders and abnormalities. However, since this is a screening test, even if the results are normal, you cannot be completely reassured. When abnormalities are found in screening tests or in high-risk pregnancies, diagnostic tests such as chorionic villus sampling or amniotic fluid testing are necessary for accurately confirming the presence of fetal abnormalities. Diagnostic tests involve direct sampling of fetal tissues for chromosomal analysis, allowing for the diagnosis of conditions resulting from chromosomal abnormalities. This includes conditions like Down syndrome, Patau syndrome, Edwards syndrome, Turner syndrome, Klinefelter syndrome, and others, expanding the range of diagnosable diseases from previously difficult-to-diagnose diseases like hemophilia, congenital adrenal hyperplasia, to spina bifida.