If you log in, you can enjoy more benefits. It is the area that connects the torso and arms, and plays an important role in the movement of the arms. Located at the upper part where the torso and arms are connected. The shoulder consists of various bones, joints, muscles, nerves, blood vessels, and more. The shoulder is comprised of three bones: the humerus, scapula, and clavicle. It has five joints — the shoulder joint, scapulohumeral joint, acromioclavicular joint, sternoclavicular joint, and the glenohumeral joint, enabling movement of the shoulder. The muscles that make up the shoulder include four muscles of the rotator cuff and the deltoid muscle. The rotator cuff consists of the supraspinatus, infraspinatus, teres minor, and subscapularis muscles. The supraspinatus is the most important muscle used frequently, performing the function of raising the arm to the side. The infraspinatus is responsible for external rotation of the shoulder, while the teres minor assists the function of the infraspinatus. The subscapularis is responsible for internal rotation of the shoulder, and the deltoid muscle plays a role in bending the arm. These muscles help to maintain shoulder stability and allow for freedom of movement. In a normal posture, the shoulder joint is slightly angled upward, aligning the upper arm naturally on the shoulder joint surface. When viewed from above, the shoulder blades are angled about 30 degrees forward, connecting to the backward-facing scapula to form a triangular joint support. The shoulder, with its various joints and muscles, plays an essential role in arm movements, especially in sending the hands behind the head or away from the body. A rotator cuff tear can occur due to trauma, degenerative changes with aging, or inflammation and wear from repetitive impacts on the rotator cuff and surrounding bones. A tear in the rotator cuff can cause shoulder pain and weakness. Adhesive capsulitis, also known as frozen shoulder, is another condition that can cause shoulder pain. Frozen shoulder refers to a condition where any slight movement of the shoulder causes pain as if the shoulder is frozen. Although both of these conditions can cause shoulder pain, they are distinct disorders. There is a simple self-diagnostic method to distinguish between these two conditions. By comparing the range of motion of the painful arm to the range of motion of the unaffected arm, one can differentiate. In cases of frozen shoulder, severe pain is felt throughout the shoulder regardless of the direction the arm is moved, making it difficult to raise the arm. On the other hand, a rotator cuff tear involves pain when moving the arm, but if you try to raise the painful arm with the healthy arm, it will be possible.