If you log in, you can take advantage of even more benefits. The spinal cord begins in the coccyx, which is the lower part of the spine. There are a total of ten sacral nerves, with half originating on the left side of the coccyx and the other half passing through the right side of the coccyx. They are responsible for the movement and nerve awareness of the lower part of our body, and they send sensory information from the organs in the pelvic cavity to the central nervous system. They branch out forward and backward through the sacral foramina, extending from the first to the fourth coccygeal nerve and exiting outside the spinal canal. They divide into anterior and posterior branches, with the anterior branches passing through the anterior sacral foramen to the front. The posterior branches extend through the posterior sacral foramen to the back. The first sacral nerve is the thickest, and the thickness decreases as it goes downward. The sacral nerves start distributing to the muscles of the buttocks and continue to the sciatic nerve, the inferior gluteal nerve, the pudendal nerve, and down to the peripheral part of the leg. The nervous fibers grouped together in a complex manner form nerve plexuses. The first and second sacral nerves, along with some of the third sacral nerve and the lumbar nerves, form a large nerve plexus, known as the sacral plexus. It is widely distributed in the pelvis and lower limbs, with even the largest sciatic nerve in the body being connected to the sacral plexus. They are responsible for the movement and nerve awareness of the lower part of our body and send sensory information from the organs in the pelvic cavity to the central nervous system. The sacral plexus starts just below the lumbar vertebrae and dominates the sensation of the lower back, pelvis, perineum, posterior thigh and hip, and the back and bottom of the foot. When the coccyx is fractured, the membrane surrounding the sacral nerves is also damaged due to tension. Coccygeal nerve can be compressed or injured by coccyx fracture, dislocation, or traction injury, which can be recoverable, but if the nerve or muscle is cut or lacerated, nerve recovery may not be possible.