Logging in will allow you to enjoy more benefits. The female reproductive organs refer to estrogen and progesterone, which are produced and secreted in the ovaries. They are made in a pair of ovaries in the pelvic cavity and secreted into the bloodstream. Cholesterol is the main ingredient in hormones produced by ovaries and is a steroid hormone. It includes estrone, estradiol, and estriol, which act by binding to receptors inside cells. Estrone: Estrogen made in the ovaries, adrenal glands, and fat is a type of estrogen that continues to be secreted even after menopause. It acts as a reservoir for estrogen and enhances the effects of estradiol. Estradiol: The most powerful and important hormone among estrogens is produced in the ovaries before menopause. It binds to estrogen receptors in the body to have an active effect, and when menopause occurs, ovarian follicles are depleted and no longer produced. Estriol: It accounts for 60-80% of total estrogen, but it is produced abundantly during pregnancy and is hardly detected in the bodies of non-pregnant women. Female hormones are produced in the mature follicles of the ovaries, promoting the development of secondary sexual characteristics in women, thickening the endometrium to implant fertilized eggs. The function of the uterine wall crumbles and thickens due to the action of female hormones, resulting in periodic changes known as menstruation. Secondary characteristics include increased size of the fallopian tubes, uterus, vagina, and external genitalia, breast development, and the appearance of axillary hair and pubic hair. Subcutaneous fat accumulates in the chest and hip area, and phenomena such as widening of the pelvis occur. Estrogen stimulates breastfeeding to maintain pregnancy and produce milk, while progesterone thickens the uterine muscle to maintain the implantation of the embryo during pregnancy. Estrogen is created only in your ovaries, while progesterone is produced in the ovaries, adrenal glands, and placenta during pregnancy. The ovaries secrete female hormones stimulated by the gonadotropic hormone from the anterior pituitary gland and estrogen affects female libido. Once the ovaries are genetically determined as reproductive organs, the physiological change that leads to the loss of this function is menopause. When menopause occurs, the face flushes regardless of the situation, the chest flutters, sweats, emotions change frequently, depression occurs, memory and concentration decrease, skin ages, joint pain occurs, and osteoporosis can occur. Hormone replacement therapy can begin for various problems related to estrogen deficiency like facial flushing, palpitations, insomnia, and relieve symptoms of urogenital discomfort. It can also increase bone density, prevent osteoporosis, reduce the risk of endometrial and colorectal cancer, and prevent cardiovascular disease if hormone replacement therapy is implemented in women before or after menopause. Since side effects such as uterine bleeding and breast pain may occur, most of the effects vary depending on the state and age of the woman receiving hormone replacement therapy. It should be used appropriately after consultation with a doctor. The most important point in taking hormone medication is to take it at the same time every day and to consult your doctor if side effects occur. If you miss a dose of hormone medication, take it as soon as possible, and if it has been less than 12 hours since the time you missed the dose, take the missed dose immediately. If more than 12 hours have passed, do not take the missed dose and take the next dose at the scheduled time. If bleeding or side effects occur, you must consult a doctor to change the dosage or ingredients of the hormone.