If you log in, you can enjoy even more benefits. The external female genitalia refers to the outer reproductive organs that are visible from the outside, including the labia majora, labia minora, clitoris, urethral opening, Skene's glands, Bartholin's glands, and pubic area. The external genitalia serves as the organ for sexual arousal for sexual intercourse and protects the internal reproductive organs from external stimuli. After puberty, the secondary sex characteristics develop, with the vulva situated between the two pelvic bones. The female external genitalia is composed of the labia majora, labia minora, clitoris, urethral opening, Skene's glands, Bartholin's glands, etc. The labia majora are the fatty layers covering the pubic bone, where hair grows during puberty. They refer to the folds that run vertically to the anus and surround the other external genitalia. The labia minora are made up of fibrous and fatty tissues and contain apocrine glands. They have sebaceous glands that produce secretions for lubrication on the inner folded skin. Above the junction of the labia minora, there is the clitoris erectile tissue in women. It is located between the clitoris and the vaginal opening, serving as the passage for expelling urine stored in the bladder. It is also where the two glandular organs located under the vagina secrete large amounts of lubricating secretions in response to sexual stimulation. The external genitalia has abundant fat distribution, protecting the internal reproductive organs from external stimuli and plays a role in sexual function by secreting lubricating fluid during sexual arousal to enable sexual intercourse. Many women complain of itching on the external genitalia. Itching of the external genitalia can be caused by inflammatory conditions, vaginitis, mechanical or chemical irritations, or infections. It can also be attributed to menopausal changes. To prevent itching, it is advisable to keep the external genitalia clean, dry, and avoid tight clothing. However, if the condition is severe, antibiotic treatment may be necessary, and it is important to consult with healthcare professionals at a hospital for appropriate medical advice and treatment.