If you log in, you can enjoy a greater variety of benefits. The 5 vertebrae extending downward from the thoracic spine support body weight and take the largest form, being more mobile compared to other vertebrae. Located at the center of the back near the waist, it sits at the lower part of the spine. Comprised of 5 vertebrae, it is the largest bone in the spinal column. The typical structure of vertebrae consists of the bulky vertebral body at the front with the vertebral foramen at the back, and the bony structure forming the hole is called the vertebral arch. The sacrum connects to the coccyx and forms a thick and deep shape at the front of the body. Diseases such as spondylolysis or spondylolisthesis often occur in this area. The spinal cord passing through the vertebral foramen extends up to the level of the first sacral vertebra, and below that level, there is no spinal cord, but a bundle of nerves descending from above passes through. It plays an important role in the movement of the trunk and supports body weight. It enables bending, extending, rotating, and creating curves on the ventral side of the spine. Lower back pain usually occurs due to herniated discs. The intervertebral disc, made of fibrocartilage that absorbs friction between the vertebrae and supports weight-bearing capacity. When a disc is dislocated from its position due to trauma to the spine or long-term poor posture, pressing or stimulating the spinal nerves can lead to lower back pain. Lower back pain typically occurs on one side, but occasionally, pain may arise in different directions from different locations. To prevent and treat lower back pain, muscles need to be flexible and strengthened. Aerobic exercise is good for that, and activities like swimming, walking, and cycling can be helpful. It's best to start with low intensity and gradually increase the exercise intensity. If pain increases persistently after starting exercise, you should consult with a doctor. Swimming, in particular, reduces the burden on spinal joints through water buoyancy and provides more effective exercise by resisting against a significant amount of resistance. Lower back pain can occur during pregnancy due to changes in posture, endocrine function, relaxation of pelvic and spinal ligaments, etc. The severity of pain may worsen for those who had lower back pain before, and some who previously didn't have lower back pain may start experiencing symptoms. In most cases, pain improves within a year after childbirth, so there is no need to worry too much.