If you log in, you can enjoy more benefits. It is a stomach-shaped digestive organ that temporarily stores and digests food that passes through the esophagus. It is located in the upper left part of the abdomen, below the left rib cage, connected to the esophagus above and the duodenum below. About 5/6 of the upper part, the cardia and fundus are slightly skewed to the left of the midline, and the narrow, thin pylorus and antrum are skewed to the right above. The stomach wall is composed of mucosal layer, submucosal layer, muscular layer, and serosal layer, with blood vessels and nerves located in the submucosal layer. The stomach is controlled by the autonomic nervous system. When the sympathetic nerves are stimulated, they inhibit coordinated movements in the stomach and decrease gastric acid secretion. The stomach can be divided into the cardiac region, fundic region, body, and pyloric region. The cardiac region is the narrow upper part connected to the esophagus. The fundic region is the protruding area on the left that touches the diaphragm. The body occupies most of the stomach and is the central part of the stomach. The pyloric region is funnel-shaped, connected to the duodenum, and has a pyloric sphincter muscle to prevent reflux. The stomach glands consist of mucous cells, chief cells, and parietal cells. Mucous cells secrete alkaline mucus to protect the gastric mucosa from gastric acid. Chief cells secrete the protein-digesting enzyme pepsin, while parietal cells mainly exist in the body of the stomach and secrete hydrochloric acid and intrinsic factor. The stomach functions to temporarily store food entering through the esophagus, secrete gastric motility and gastric juice containing secreted, break down food into small pieces for digestion. The gastric juice secreted from the stomach aids in the activation of pepsin, an enzyme necessary for protein digestion, and also performs antiseptic action due to its strong acidity. Gastric ulcers occur when the stomach mucosa is damaged. If gastric ulcers occur, symptoms such as abdominal pain, heartburn, nausea, weight loss, vomiting, and black stools may persist. Neglecting an ulcer can lead to the risk of perforation, and chronic ulcers can potentially develop into cancer, so proper management and treatment are necessary. Although gastric ulcers can heal on their own, more than half are known to recur if Helicobacter pylori treatment is not administered, so testing and treatment for H. pylori can be performed if there is a gastric ulcer or a history of one.