Logging in will allow you to enjoy more benefits. Breasts exist in both males and females, but for females, their role and significance are greater as they perform the function of growth and lactation after childbirth. Breasts are human mammary glands located from the second to the sixth rib, composed of ducts and fatty tissue. Breasts begin to develop during puberty and will atrophy after menopause. They are positioned vertically from the second to the sixth rib of the sternum and horizontally along the midaxillary line from the sternal notch to the armpit. The shape of breasts varies from individual to individual but is typically hemispherical. In females, breasts develop during puberty under the stimulation of estrogen and progesterone, and as aging and menopause progress, glandular tissue gradually degenerates and is replaced by internal fat, losing elasticity and atrophying. Breasts consist of about 15-20 lobes, each divided into multiple lobules which are connected to ducts. Milk produced in the lobules is released through ducts to the nipple. When the baby suckles, oxytocin triggers the milk ejection reflex causing milk to be expelled. The nipple serves as the passage for delivering breast milk. The areola is the dark area surrounding the nipple and contains Montgomery glands. During pregnancy, Montgomery glands enlarge to secrete cleansing and lubricating substances to protect the nipple. If Montgomery glands increase in size, the nipple enlarges, darkens in color, develops bumps resembling acne, and undergoes changes in shape. During pregnancy, estrogen, progesterone, and prolactin hormones cause the internal breast tissues to develop and produce milk. Breasts not only symbolize feminine beauty but also serve the function of the sensory nerves. Women are advised to perform breast self-examinations to detect any abnormalities. Self-examinations should be done 2-7 days after the end of menstruation when the breasts are most tender. For women who have undergone hysterectomy or reached menopause, it is recommended to perform self-examinations regularly on a set day each month. Initially, observe the breasts in front of a mirror, then palpate while sitting or standing, and finally while lying down. During self-examination, check for breast size and symmetry, presence of lumps, any indented areas, normal skin color, and signs of swelling. Also, examine the size and shape of the nipples, their direction, and the presence of discharge.