If you log in, you can enjoy more benefits. The ear consists of the outer, middle, and inner ear in that order, responsible for hearing and balance. The middle ear is located between the eardrum and the cochlea ducts of the ear, connecting the inner ear and the nasopharynx. This part, also known as the Eustachian tube, is usually closed but functions to regulate pressure when there is a risk of damage due to differences in pressure between the middle ear and the ambient air. Located between the middle ear and the nasopharynx, the Eustachian tube is a tube about 3 to 4 cm long that connects from the inner space of the middle ear to the nasopharynx at the back of the nose. The upper part of the tube is surrounded by narrow bones and widens downward, transitioning into cartilaginous bones. Inside, small hairs help drain secretions from the middle ear into the nasopharynx. In children, the Eustachian tube is shorter and more horizontal, making it easier for bacteria and viruses to travel up to the middle ear, causing infections. As children grow, the Eustachian tube lengthens and develops a slope, making it easier to expel mucus and debris, reducing the risk of infection. The Eustachian tube aids ventilation of the middle ear, removes secretions, and maintains equal pressure between the middle ear and the outside, preventing damage. While the Eustachian tube is normally closed, it opens during yawning or swallowing to equalize the pressure between the external and middle ear. When a cold or inflammation blocks the Eustachian tube, symptoms like a sense of fullness in the ear, hearing loss, ringing in the ear (tinnitus), and difficulty maintaining balance can occur. The sensation of ear fullness or popping when an airplane or elevator ascends or descends is caused by pressure differences between the external environment and the middle ear, leading to the twisting of the eardrum and blockage of the Eustachian tube. The eardrum, located at the boundary between the external and internal body, protects against rupturing due to pressure differences by twisting to adapt. If the external pressure drops, the eardrum and Eustachian tube quickly readjust and the symptoms disappear. However, if the pressure difference continues to increase, the eardrum may rupture, causing hearing impairment. To prevent ear damage from sudden altitude changes, it may be helpful to take antihistamines and decongestants beforehand. If you have a cold or ear infection, postponing or avoiding air travel can be beneficial. When infants are on a plane, sucking on a bottle or pacifier can help keep the Eustachian tube open and prevent a rapid increase in ear pressure.