By logging in, you can enjoy a wider range of benefits. The chorion is a membrane surrounding the fetus, located between the uterus and the amniotic membrane. Inside the chorion, there is the amnion which wraps the fetus from the inside. The chorion villi that protrude from the chorion are called chorionic villi, playing a role in maximizing contact with the mother's blood. It is located between the fetus and the uterus, connecting to the uterus from the placenta side. When the sperm and ovum meet and fertilization occurs, the zygote undergoes various shape changes. Inside, it forms the embryo to be a fetus, develops an outer wall, and implants into the uterus about a week after fertilization. The outer wall cells become the chorion surrounding the fetus, and thin protrusions extend from the chorion towards the mother's uterine lining. The chorionic villi are made up of about 20 thin stalk-like protrusions on the placenta side, densely packed to seep into the uterus, connecting the mother and the baby. Some of the fetus's chorionic villi and part of the mother's uterine lining merge to form the placenta. The inside of the placenta is connected to the fetus through the umbilical cord, and the outer side is connected to the uterus through the chorion. Furthermore, because the chorionic villi are originated from the zygote, it is composed of chromosomes almost identical to the fetus. Chorionic villus sampling can be used as a prenatal test to detect fetal abnormalities by testing a part of the chorionic villi and examining chromosomes. Chorionic villi attach to the uterus, supplying oxygen and nutrients to the fetus through the umbilical cord. At the same time, waste and carbon dioxide are exchanged through the chorion into the mother's blood. The fetal and maternal blood vessels are not directly connected but efficiently exchange blood components through the very thin tissue of the chorion. The chorion also secretes chorionic gonadotropin hormone to maintain pregnancy. The hormone starts to be secreted after the zygote has implanted into the uterus and is rapidly secreted until two months but continues at a low concentration throughout the pregnancy from three months onwards. During pregnancy, all expectant mothers can monitor their pregnancy status through blood tests, ultrasounds, etc., and can detect congenital genetic diseases and abnormalities. However, as this is a screening test, even if the results come back normal, one cannot be completely reassured. In cases where abnormalities are found in screening tests or for high-risk pregnant women, diagnostic tests such as chorionic villus sampling or amniocentesis are required to accurately confirm the presence of fetal abnormalities. Diagnostic tests involve direct collection of fetal tissue to analyze chromosomes and can diagnose diseases caused by chromosomal abnormalities, such as Down syndrome, Patau syndrome, Edwards syndrome, Turner syndrome, and Klinefelter syndrome, as well as diseases that were previously difficult to diagnose like hemophilia, congenital adrenal hyperplasia, spina bifida.