If you log in, you can enjoy a wider range of benefits. The endocrine cells are scattered like islands among the exocrine functions of the pancreas, secreting hormones related to metabolic regulation such as insulin and glucagon to control blood sugar. The pancreas is located in the upper central part of the abdomen, and the islets of Langerhans are distributed within the pancreas. There are about 1.5 million islets in the pancreas, accounting for about 1-2% of its weight. The diameter of the islets of Langerhans is about 50-100µm, and they are relatively abundant at the end of the pancreas. Beta cells are located in the center of the islets and account for about 65-80% of all pancreatic islet cells. Alpha cells account for about 15-20% of pancreatic islet cells, while delta cells account for about 3-10%. The clusters of cells that secrete hormones are called islets of Langerhans, and there are three types of cells that make up the pancreatic islet cells, each with different functions. Alpha and beta cells in the islets of Langerhens can detect changes in blood sugar levels directly within the islet cells without regulation of the autonomic nervous system and secrete insulin and glucagon. Insulin and glucagon secreted from the islets of Langerhans interact with each other. Alpha cells: produce glucagon, which promotes the release of glucose from the liver and the release of fat from adipose tissue into the bloodstream, acting opposite to insulin. This role increases blood sugar levels. Beta cells: produce insulin, a hormone that regulates the metabolism of carbohydrates, fats, and proteins. Insulin promotes cells to undergo metabolism, inhibits the release of glucose from the liver into the blood, promotes the absorption of amino acids by muscle cells, and inhibits the breakdown of fats into the bloodstream. When blood sugar is high, the secretion of insulin is stimulated to lower blood sugar levels. If beta cell function is impaired, insulin is not produced, leading to diabetes. Delta cells: secrete somatostatin and somatotropin, of which somatostatin inhibits digestive action in the gastrointestinal tract and regulates the secretion of other hormones in the body. Type 1 diabetes occurs when beta cells in the pancreas are destroyed by an autoimmune reaction. This condition, also known as insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, requires insulin injections for survival since the body cannot produce insulin internally. Type 1 diabetes typically manifests acute symptoms due to high blood sugar, occurring primarily in teenagers and rarely after the age of 40.