Logging in will give you access to even more benefits. The largest salivary gland to secrete saliva is located underneath each ear, producing a watery secretion without mucous. It is located in the lower part of both ears. It is the largest salivary gland, shaped like an inverted triangle located under each ear. The size of both sublingual glands is similar, and there are ducts to move the saliva secreted by these glands. The ducts of the sublingual glands connect to the buccal mucosa in the upper part of the mouth, where a clear liquid saliva is secreted. When food enters the mouth, saliva is secreted from many salivary glands. When the autonomic nervous system stimulates the parasympathetic nervous system through various nerve ganglions, the sublingual glands are stimulated to secrete saliva. Saliva helps to soften food and contains the digestive enzyme amylase, aiding in digestion. Saliva also acts as an antimicrobial substance, contributing to the body's defense mechanism in preventing dental caries and periodontal diseases. It also provides lubrication when speaking. The generated saliva is secreted into the mouth through the sublingual duct. The amount and properties of saliva secreted vary depending on the type of food, which also affects the salivary glands that are stimulated to secrete saliva. Saliva secreted by food stimulation is mostly produced by the sublingual glands. The sublingual glands mainly secrete watery saliva and are the most common site for salivary gland tumors. Vaccination for epidemic parotitis is mainly administered as part of the Measles/Mumps/Rubella (MMR) vaccine to prevent mumps. A total of 2 doses of MMR vaccine should be given at 12-15 months and 4-6 years of age. This vaccine is not recommended for administration to pregnant women, those using certain immunosuppressive drugs, or individuals with immunodeficiency disorders. In cases of sublingual gland inflammation or swelling, it is recommended to avoid stimulating foods and fruit juices and applying cold compresses can help reduce swelling.