Logging in will allow you to access even more benefits. The pronounced part located at the outermost part of the mouth, the skin of the lips has a lot of capillary distribution, giving off a red color. Lips allow for various movements such as eating and speaking. Positioned in the center of the lower part of the face, it sits horizontally between the upper and lower jaws. Located at the forefront of the mouth, one on each side between the upper and lower jaws. The center of the lips protrudes thickly, with the lower lip usually thicker and larger than the upper lip. Rich in capillary distribution, the lips appear redder compared to other skin, without the presence of hair follicles or sebaceous glands. Lips are highly sensitive to sensory nerves, reacting sensitively to temperature and touch. The groove that extends from the center of the upper lip to the nose is called the philtrum. Hair and sebaceous glands are distributed around the lips, and the muscles around the lips allow for various movements of the lips and mouth. By changing the structure of the lips, tongue, and oral cavity, sounds can be produced and precise pronunciation can be achieved, while closing the lips helps prevent food in the mouth from entering the digestive system. Additionally, the nerves on the surface of the lips respond to stimuli such as touch and temperature. By moving the lips and surrounding muscles, facial expressions can be changed, and they are used in various forms of communication such as expressing intimacy by contacting another person's lips. Cold sores that occur on the lips during fatigue are caused by the herpes simplex virus. Once infected on the skin of the lips, this skin disease is almost impossible to cure. The virus lies dormant in the sensory nerves and can resurface when triggered by stress, accumulated fatigue, lack of sleep, and other factors. In most cases, herpes virus infections do not require treatment, and natural healing can be supported by keeping the area around the disease clean and dry. To prevent further infections, avoid touching the infected area with your hands, wash your hands frequently, be cautious about contact with children, consume plenty of vitamins, eat enough vegetables and fruits, and get sufficient rest and sleep.