By logging in, you can enjoy more benefits. The vestibular system, located deep inside the ear, detects horizontal and vertical linear accelerations, as well as rotational movements, and transmits them to the brain's central balance organ to maintain the body's balance. The vestibular system detects the direction of gravity to help the body maintain correct posture in the vertical and horizontal planes. It is located in the innermost part of the ear. The ear is composed of the external ear, middle ear, and inner ear in that order, which are responsible for hearing and balance sensation. The innermost part of the ear, called the inner ear, contains the cochlea responsible for hearing sounds and the vestibular system responsible for balance sensation. The vestibular system is connected to the cochlea and refers to the semicircular canals and vestibule. The vestibule is the part of the vestibular system that transitions into the cochlea and is located between the cochlea and semicircular canals. It consists of a round pouch and an oval pouch filled with lymph fluid and stones of various sizes. The three semicircular canals connected to the vestibule are perpendicular to each other and are located in three planes, filled with lymph fluid. The vestibular nerve, branching off from the vestibular nerve (nerve of balance), connects to the cochlear nerve leading to the cochlea and the vestibular nerve connected to the vestibular system. When the body moves, the lymph fluid and stones in the vestibule move to detect movements in the vertical and horizontal planes, detecting the body's movements. If the stones move from their original position for any reason or get stuck somewhere, they can overly stimulate nerves responsible for perceiving posture, leading to sensations of dizziness. The stones' movement helps detect rotational movements by flowing the lymph fluid inside the three planes of the semicircular canals. The stones, located around the semicircular canals, are substances involved in maintaining balance. If the stones fall from their original position or get stuck somewhere for any reason, they can cause symptoms that make the surroundings feel like they are spinning, although the exact cause is not clear, benign paroxysmal positional vertigo may be triggered by factors such as external impacts, viral infections, or side effects of medication. It can occur at any age, but it is more common after the age of 40-50. Dizziness can range from mild symptoms to severe cases causing fear. Dizziness is characterized by a sensation of spinning, similar to the feeling after a roller coaster ride or after spinning in a playground swing. Even if the symptoms are severe, they typically subside within 1 minute, a characteristic of benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. It is important to consult with a doctor and undergo tests to determine if benign paroxysmal positional vertigo is present. In most cases, benign paroxysmal positional vertigo improves within a few weeks without any treatment, and there are rarely any lingering effects. However, prompt diagnosis and successful treatment can immediately improve symptoms of dizziness, so it is important to receive appropriate examination and treatment at the right time. Additionally, if dizziness persists severely, it is advisable to seek a medical examination as dizziness may be caused by other serious diseases.