By logging in, you can enjoy a variety of benefits. The vestibulocochlear nerve, which is the eighth of the 12 cranial nerves, is part of the vestibulocochlear nerve of the inner ear nerve components. The vestibulocochlear nerve is divided into the vestibular and cochlear parts, each performing different functions. The vestibular nerve creates the vestibular ganglion near the end of the inner ear duct, then bifurcates into two branches that distribute to the vestibule and semicircular canals, responsible for balance sense and head position sense. It extends from the brainstem to the semicircular canals of the inner ear. The vestibular nerve can be damaged by fractures of adjacent temporal bones or tumors of the brainstem and cerebellum. After the vestibular part of the vestibulocochlear nerve forms the vestibular ganglion at the base of the inner ear, it divides into upper and lower parts. The vestibular nerve passes through small holes in the upper and lower vestibular parts at the base of the inner ear, branching out to form neuroepithelium in the semicircular canals. The long central processes connect to the brainstem and enter the cerebellum. The vestibular nerve transmits information about balance, position, and muscle tension related to the inner ear's parallel inner ear. It is involved in balance sense based on the speed of movement and position sense information based on changes in head direction. Be cautious when using antibiotics and anticancer drugs that can affect the vestibular nerve and cause impacts on the head or ear, as disorders of vestibular function can lead to difficulty in walking and maintaining balance. Always be careful about situations where you may fall or bump into things in daily life. Especially in the elderly, it can lead to serious conditions, so pay special attention. Vestibular neuritis occurs when inflammation affects the vestibular nerve, causing dizziness, vertigo, and nausea. Unlike disorders of the central nervous system, you may feel positional vertigo, and it often occurs after upper respiratory tract infections. It usually improves with symptomatic treatment and typically lasts for 1-2 days.