If you log in, you can enjoy even more benefits. The sciatic nerve is the largest single nerve in the body that branches off from the bottom of the sacral plexus, which is formed by the merging of the lumbar and sacral nerves, in the buttock area of the lower part of the sciatic nerve. It splits and travels down the back of the leg, branching into the tibial nerve and common fibular nerve. It emerges from the sciatic nerve root in the pelvis and continues down the back of the leg. As the largest nerve in the human body, it passes from the pelvis, through the buttocks, and down the back of the thigh to the posterior thigh. It originates from the sacral plexus, exits the pelvis, passes through the muscles on the inner side of the buttocks towards the back of the thigh, and branches out to distribute all the way to the skin of the calf and foot. Near the hip, it splits into the thick medial tibial nerve and the thin lateral common fibular nerve. Sometimes, the division point between the tibial and common fibular nerves is closer to the pelvis than the knee. It is involved in sensation and motor control of the leg, responsible for bending the knee at the upper part of the knee. When divided into the tibial and common fibular nerves, it is also involved in the sensation of the leg and foot and in moving the ankle. The tibial nerve is distributed to the calf's posterior and sole, governing the movement of the muscles in those regions. The common fibular nerve is distributed to the front and outer side of the calf and the skin on the top of the foot, to move the muscles in those regions. Sciatica occurs due to infection, nerve compression, injury, or lumbar disc herniation, with the most common cause being the herniation of the lumbar disc pressing on the sciatic nerve. Shortening of surrounding muscles or muscle spasms can compress the sciatic nerve, and pain can also occur due to surrounding tissue and sciatic nerve damage. Pregnancy does not significantly increase the risk of sciatica. This is because the anatomical location where the fetus compresses the sciatic nerve as it grows. Pain in the pelvis and lower limbs caused by pregnancy is more likely due to pelvic girdle pain than sciatica, which is related to the loosening of the pelvic joints and ligaments during pregnancy. This loosening can lead to pressure on surrounding joints and muscles, causing pain, which can be mistakenly attributed to sciatica when pain occurs in the back of the pelvis. The incidence of sciatica during pregnancy is generally quite low, around 1%.