If you log in, you can enjoy more benefits. The elbow is a joint formed by the meeting of the upper part of the arm bone, the ulna, and the lower part of the arm bone, the radius, and the humerus. It is located at the midpoint where the humerus and the radius, and ulna meet in the middle of both arms. It is a hinge joint formed at the meeting point of these three bones. There are three types of elbow joints: humeroradial joint, humeroulnar joint, and radioulnar joint, and ligaments such as the lateral collateral ligament, the ulnar collateral ligament, and the annular ligament secure the bones and protect the joint. The elbow joint facilitates bending and straightening movements where the upper and lower parts of the arm meet and governs rotational movements of the arm along with the wrist. It allows flexion and extension of about 30-130 degrees between the humerus and the forearm, pronation and supination at the point where the wrist and the forearm meet at about 50 degrees. Issues with the elbow joint can arise due to sports activities, trauma, or repetitive movements related to occupations. They are commonly seen in sports activities involving racquets or throwing, and frequently occur in professions requiring repetitive actions such as resistance exercises or arm rotations. Elbow pain occurs when the hand is used repetitively. It is commonly known as "tennis elbow" as it often occurs after playing tennis, but it can also affect housewives or laborers who work with their hands. The following are exercises that can help immediately alleviate and prevent elbow pain. 1. Elbow Muscle Massage Relax the painful arm completely. Apply oil or cream to the muscles. Press deep into the muscles with the thumb of the opposite hand, slowly moving downwards. (Approximately 5 minutes) 2. Press the Elbow Muscle and Rotate the Wrist Grasp the arm with the thumb of the opposite hand placed on the sore elbow muscle. While the thumb presses the muscle, slowly rotate the painful arm wrist. (Clockwise/counterclockwise 5 times each, 5 sets) 3. Pronator Stretch Extend the arm forward with the palm facing up to the sky. Grab the palm with the opposite hand and pull it downwards, slightly rotating the elbow towards the sky. Keep the hand fixed without rotating it. 4. Hammer Curl Hold a weight of 1-1.5kg, such as a dumbbell or a water bottle in your hand. Secure the elbow to the torso and raise and lower the hand as if hammering. Increase the weight by 0.5-1kg once the strength improves. *Caution: Start strength exercises when the pain is almost gone, and only perform massage and stretching before that. Avoid repetitive hand movements or excessive work.