If you log in, you can enjoy even more benefits. The dermis is a thick layer of cells beneath the epidermis that affects the skin's elasticity, radiance, and tension. It is divided into the papillary layer, reticular layer, and subcutaneous layer from the uppermost layer. It has a complex structure intertwined with the circulatory, nervous, and lymphatic systems to supply nutrients to the epidermis, support the epidermis, maintain and protect the other tissues of the skin by its robustness. It is distributed throughout the body and located below the epidermis. The skin is divided into three parts: the epidermis, dermis, and subcutaneous tissue. The epidermis is located at the top, while the dermis is below the epidermis and firmly connected to the basal layer of the epidermis, the last part of the epidermis. The dermis contains structures such as hair follicles, arrector pili muscles, sebaceous glands, sweat glands, blood vessels, and nerves. The dermis consists of cells such as fibroblasts, adipocytes, histiocytes, Langerhans cells, lymphocytes, and connective and elastic fibers, making up the matrix part without a specific form. Dense meshlike connective tissue fibers anchor the epidermis firmly, with some fibers penetrating into the epidermal part. Melanocytes are mainly located in the epidermis but are also present at the junction of the epidermis. Hair is one of the skin's accessory organs, and epidermal cells enveloping hair cells enter the dermis to form roots at the junction with the subcutaneous tissue. The subcutaneous tissue located beneath the dermis is the fatty tissue at the bottom of the skin. Muscles and bones are located beneath the skin. The dermis, with its thick layer, protects the body from external pressure and tension. Nerves in the dermis detect contact and heat, while blood vessels supply nutrients to cells and remove waste materials. While getting a tan under the sun may make you look cool and healthy, it is important to remember that skin cells can be damaged. Therefore, when the sun's rays are strong and outdoor activities increase in the summer, it is a good idea to think about ways to protect your skin. Severe sun damage can lead to skin cancer, including basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and malignant melanoma. The reasons for the different types of skin cancer that occur in individuals are not exactly known, but it is speculated to be related to the intensity of sunlight and the duration of exposure. The most important thing to prevent skin cancer and damage is to properly apply sunscreen. The major UV rays that can be blocked are UVA and UVB, with UVB being the component that causes sunburn and the higher the SPF (sun protection factor), the better the blocking function. UVA can damage the dermis of the skin, even without causing sunburn, and can lead to skin cancer. Therefore, it is important to choose a product that can block both UVA and UVB rays. Additionally, it is important to apply sunscreen sufficiently. SPF 15 is adequate for daily use, while SPF 30 or higher is recommended for outdoor activities, apply sunscreen 30 minutes before going out to help it absorb. Reapply every two hours and try to avoid exposure to sunlight as much as possible between 10 a.m. and 3 p.m. when UV intensity is high.