If you log in, you can enjoy even more benefits. It serves as a passage connecting a woman's uterus and external genitalia, made up of muscles, it is the external reproductive organ. The vagina is a pathway that expels menstrual blood, serves as the passage for the baby during childbirth, and the site where the male reproductive organ is inserted during sexual intercourse. The vagina is positioned at a 45-degree angle connecting a woman's uterus and external genitalia. It lies in front of the bladder and urethra, and closely behind the rectum. The vagina is composed of muscles, and its wall consists of a muscle layer, connective tissue, and a mucous membrane layer. The mucous membrane layer is made up of multiple epithelial cells and can expand due to its folds. The diameter of the vagina is approximately 2-3 cm, with the cervix located at the upper part and the hymen at the lower part, making the vaginal canal narrow. The vagina acts as a passage for menstrual blood during menstruation. During childbirth, it serves as the pathway for the baby in the process of delivery, and during sexual intercourse, it is where the male reproductive organ is inserted and ejaculation takes place. The vagina secretes colorless and odorless acidic secretion with a pH of 3.5-4.5 to prevent the entry of external bacteria. The most common disease women visit a gynecologist for is vaginitis. The normal secretion from a woman's vagina is colorless and odorless, but the appearance and viscosity of the secretion vary according to the menstrual cycle. During ovulation, pre-menstruation, pregnancy, or when taking contraceptives, brownish secretions may occur; during ovulation, clear and sticky secretions may be present. If there is an increase in vaginal secretions, an unusual odor, burning sensation, itching, and pain in the external genitalia, you may suspect vaginitis. Common causative microorganisms for vaginitis include Trichomonas, Candida, Gardnerella, Chlamydia, and herpes virus, among others.