If you log in, you can enjoy more benefits. The pancreas is an organ located behind the stomach and is one of the digestive organs. The pancreas performs functions such as secreting digestive enzymes to digest food and secreting insulin and glucagon hormones to regulate our body's blood sugar levels. The pancreas is adjacent to the transverse colon and stomach to the front, the small intestine below, and the pancreas head is adjacent to the superior mesenteric vein and celiac trunk, the body is adjacent to the superior mesenteric artery and vein, and the tail part is adjacent to the left kidney and spleen. The pancreas is about 15cm long, weighs about 100g, and has a thin and elongated shape that can be divided into three parts: head, body, and tail. Pancreatic cells produce pancreatic juice, which is excreted into the duodenum through the pancreatic duct. The part where the pancreatic duct is connected to the duodenum is called the ampulla of Vater. If there is a problem with the pancreas, bile discharge may also be affected because bile produced in the liver is also expelled through this pathway, which can lead to jaundice. The pancreas has a structure called the Islets of Langerhans, where alpha cells and beta cells secrete glucagon and insulin to regulate metabolism. The pancreas performs both exocrine and endocrine functions. The pancreas mainly performs exocrine function by secreting pancreatic juice through the pancreatic duct. The secreted pancreatic juice meets bile and flows into the small intestine to assist in digestion. The endocrine function of the pancreas is carried out in the Islets of Langerhans, where alpha cells secrete glucagon to raise blood sugar levels and beta cells secrete insulin to lower blood sugar levels, thereby regulating our body's blood sugar levels. Pancreatic cancer is known to have a poor prognosis among cancers due to its difficulty in early diagnosis. Pancreatic cancer does not show clear symptoms in the early stages, and even when symptoms appear, they are nonspecific, such as loss of appetite, weight loss, and abdominal pain, making early diagnosis difficult. Moreover, because of the location of the pancreas behind the peritoneum with many surrounding blood vessels, there is a high possibility of metastasis at the time of diagnosis. However, pancreatic cancer that develops in the head area may cause jaundice, so it can be detected more quickly than those that occur in the body or tail.