If you log in, you can enjoy a variety of benefits even more. It is a strong organ embedded in the upper and lower jaw that crushes food into small pieces, aids in digestion by breaking down food well, and promotes absorption. Normally, a person's teeth are replaced once as they grow, which can be divided into deciduous and permanent teeth accordingly. A human has 32 permanent teeth, located in the upper and lower jaw. A tooth is composed of dentin, enamel, cementum, gingiva, periodontal ligament, alveolar bone, pulp, root canal, and jaw bone. The hard, white-translucent substance covering the tooth canal is what you see as the white part of the tooth. Since dentin does not have nerves, decay that only affects dentin does not cause toothaches, but when it reaches the enamel, toothaches begin. It is the strong area surrounding the tooth root that is softer than dentin. It plays a role in anchoring the tooth to the alveolar bone, and if cementum becomes degenerated, the tooth may become loose. It refers to the area surrounding the tooth root. Blood vessels and nerves supply nutrients to the tooth in this area. It is a fibrous connective tissue between the root and alveolar bone that attaches the tooth to the bone and is also called the periodontal ligament. It is the root part of the tooth. It serves as a pathway through which nerves and blood vessels pass in the root canal of the tooth socket. It refers to the bone where the root is located. Teeth play a role in digesting food easily by crushing it finely through the chewing function, ensuring that the digestive juices are well mixed to facilitate digestion. They also play a role in forming accurate speech. For proper tooth brushing, a toothbrush with bristles that are not too soft or too hard but medium is recommended, and the size of the toothbrush head should be able to cover 2-3 teeth. If a toothbrush is used for a long time causing the bristles to spread, it will not effectively clean the teeth and may even cause damage to the gums, so it is advisable to replace it every 3 months. Brushing your teeth at least 3 times a day, preferably immediately after meals, is recommended.