If you log in, you can enjoy even more benefits. It is an organ that protrudes in the center of the face and is responsible for breathing and sense of smell. It is located in the middle of the face in a protruding shape. The nose is composed of cartilage in the front and bone in the back. The cartilage makes up the lower 2/3 of the nose and is composed of a total of 5 pieces. The upper cartilage is attached to the nasal bones and septal cartilage, making it less mobile, but the lower cartilage can easily move when touched. The part of the nose formed by the lower cartilage is called the ala of the nose and the space inside the dome-shaped nostril is called the nasal vestibule. Since the nasal vestibule is a wider space compared to the nostrils, the air that enters stays in the nasal vestibule, creating a good state for breathing before passing into the nasal cavity. There are nasal hairs between the nasal vestibule and the nasal cavity that act as filters for foreign substances and impurities. Along the outer wall of the nasal cavity, there are superior, middle, and inferior turbinates, and as air passes through these spaces, it comes into contact with the moist nasal mucosa, gaining temperature, moisture, and removing impurities. The nasal mucosa epithelium contains cilia, and the movement of cilia transports foreign substances or mucus in the nostrils to the throat. The nose performs the functions of breathing and smelling. The nose is not only a short passageway for air but also functions as a filter for more than 90% of dust and bacteria in the air, and regulates the temperature and humidity of the air. Also, the nose contains olfactory nerves that allow us to smell. Additionally, because it is located in the center of the face, it is an important part aesthetically determining the overall image of the face. Allergic rhinitis occurs when the nasal mucosa reacts to antigens, causing symptoms such as repeated sneezing, clear runny nose, nasal congestion, itching, etc. The recent increase in allergic rhinitis is attributed to air pollution and sudden climate change. When exposed to sensitive substances, the body's immune response reacts to these substances, leading to allergic rhinitis, which can occur due to genetic or environmental factors. Antigens that trigger allergic rhinitis include pollen, mold, dust mites, pet dander, food, drugs, and more. Allergic rhinitis is not a life-threatening condition, but it can exacerbate other respiratory diseases such as asthma and sinusitis, so it is advisable to seek appropriate treatment. Treatment for allergic rhinitis includes methods to avoid direct exposure to antigens, medication therapy, immunotherapy, surgery, etc.