By logging in, you can enjoy even more benefits. The placenta plays a role in protecting the fetus to survive and grow inside the mother's uterus during pregnancy. The placenta originates from the fetus. In human embryos, after about 4-5 days post-fertilization, a pouch-shaped structure is formed, where the inner cluster of cells will later grow into the fetus, while the outer pouch will grow into the placenta. The placenta attaches to the mother's uterine wall and connects to the fetus through the umbilical cord, and it can be located anywhere in the uterus. When the placenta is positioned below, blocking the cervix, it is called placenta previa, which can make natural delivery difficult. After childbirth, the placenta naturally detaches within minutes, but if the placenta is attached to areas lacking or with defects in the basal plate, or if there is placental adhesion to the uterine muscle, it is known as placental adhesion disorder. The placenta weighs about 350-750g, roughly equivalent to 1/6 of the fetal weight. As pregnancy progresses, the placenta continues to grow, but after 40 weeks, its degradation accelerates, which may lead to fetal distress if delivery is delayed. The placenta can be divided into the basal plate, chorionic tissue, and chorionic membrane. The chorionic membrane surrounds the fetus and amniotic sac within the placenta, facilitating nutrient exchange between the mother and the fetus. It produces and secretes hormones needed during pregnancy and facilitates maternal-fetal nutrient, gas, and antibody exchange. Since the fetus lacks functional lungs for gas exchange, oxygen and carbon dioxide are exchanged through the placenta, enabling respiration. The placenta absorbs nutrients and eliminates waste through its chorionic villi. It also transfers maternal antibodies to perform immune functions and prevents harmful substances from reaching the fetus. The placenta's size can vary depending on the mother, and being too small or too thick can cause issues. Conditions such as fetal chromosomal abnormalities, maternal diabetes, anemia, infection, Rh incompatibility, and conditions like preeclampsia or placental vascular circulation disorders can affect placental size. While the placenta filters out harmful substances, some drugs, bacteria, soot, alcohol, and other harmful substances could pass through to the fetus, so caution is necessary.