Logging in will allow you to access more benefits. The jaw is the area around the mouth and can refer to both the upper jaw and lower jaw, although sometimes only the lower jaw is mentioned. The jaw is an organ that helps in chewing food and pronunciation. It is located in the lower part of the face and surrounds the teeth. The part that extends from the center of the face to the bottom is called the jaw, and it is composed of the upper jaw and lower jaw. The maxilla, also known as the upper jaw bone, is attached to the skull, and the mandible (lower jaw bone) is connected to the skull and allows for movement. Between the upper jaw and lower jaw, the teeth are aligned, and on the sides without teeth, there are joints, muscles, and ligaments connecting the upper jaw bone and lower jaw bone. The upper teeth are located on the maxilla where the nasal cavity and palate meet, with the upper part of the maxilla forming the floor of the eye sockets and the nasal wall, while the lower part forms the roof of the mouth. There is an empty space called the maxillary sinus inside. The mandible is a large, sturdy U-shaped bone with the lower teeth. The mandible is divided into a body part with teeth and a branch part without teeth. The teeth in the mandible are aligned horizontally along the bone, and the structure of the mandible transitions from the body part to the branch part at almost a right angle. This transition is called the mandibular angle, which is the part where the jaw bone is removed during orthognathic surgery. A bulging bump on the branch part of the mandible meets the side of the skull to form the joint. There are three types of salivary glands around the mandible: submandibular glands near the jaw joint, sublingual glands around the mandibular angle, and sublingual glands inside the mandible. The jaw corrects the shape and balance of the face, enables speaking and chewing by aligning the teeth with the help of both jaw joints. The internal space created by the jaw, called the oral cavity, resonates sound and helps remove secretions around the jaw. The salivary glands in the jaw area produce saliva and release it into the mouth. Jaw deformity includes mandibular retrognathia commonly known as underbite, maxillary retrusion and mandibular protrusion known as overbite, and facial asymmetry. While deformities often occur in the mandible, particularly in the area forming the jaw joint. Even if a deformity starts from one place, the jaw joint is a connection between the mandible and maxilla, so deformities can affect adjacent bones. Jaw deformities are often congenital, but can also be influenced by factors such as inflammation, tumors, fractures, etc. The ultimate goal of treatment is to functionally and aesthetically modify the jaw appropriately. Treatment methods include surgical procedures and orthodontic therapy to help move the jaw bone.