If you log in, you can enjoy more benefits. Located in the back of the eye and nose, there is an organ rich in lymphocytes that performs the immune function of our body. Tonsils can be divided into the pharyngeal tonsil, tubal tonsil, palatine tonsil, and lingual tonsil, and they grow larger gradually until around 5 years old and then become smaller. They are located near the palatine tonsils in the back of the eye and nose. Tonsils belong to the lymphoid tissue. The tissue inside the tonsils is composed of lymphoid tissue covered by a structure of stratified squamous epithelium. Tonsils can be divided into the pharyngeal tonsil, tubal tonsil, palatine tonsil, and lingual tonsil. Located between the nose and throat, it is also known as adenoids. Like the pharyngeal tonsil, it is located between the nose and throat. It is located on either side of the palatine tonsils that are visible when you open your mouth. It is difficult to observe directly as it is located at the base of the tongue. Tonsils perform immune functions that defend our body primarily against bacteria, viruses, etc., that invade from the outside due to its richness in lymphocytes. However, with repeated upper respiratory infections, the tonsils can become abnormally enlarged and cause problems. The exact function of the tonsils is not yet fully understood, and there are still various theories. Generally, in young children who have a high frequency of upper respiratory infections, the tonsils proliferate and enlarge, playing an important role in forming the defense mechanism against childhood infections then subsequently shrinking. The most common cause of a sore throat with fever is tonsillitis. If you have tonsillitis, your throat will be sore when swallowing saliva or food, and you can visually confirm that the tonsils are swollen and reddened. Treatment for tonsillitis is generally the same as for a common cold, but in cases of chronic tonsillitis, which may lead to complications in other organs such as the heart, a tonsillectomy may be performed.