If you log in, you can enjoy a wider range of benefits. The respiratory system is responsible for our body's breathing, supplying oxygen and removing carbon dioxide. Lungs are located within the chest cavity called the thoracic cavity, surrounded by the rib cage. The heart is positioned in the front left part of the thoracic cavity, with the lungs occupying the rest of the space, separated below by the diaphragm into the abdominal space called the abdominal cavity. The lungs are divided into three lobes on the right side and two lobes on the left side, surrounded by a double-layered thin membrane called the pleura. The space between the pleura is called the pleural cavity, where pleural fluid flows to aid in the contraction and relaxation of the lungs. The lungs are connected to the airway through bronchi, branching into primary bronchi, lobar bronchi, segmental bronchi, subsegmental bronchi, and finally bronchioles where air sacs called alveoli facilitate gas exchange. The right lung is wider but shorter and heavier than the left lung, responsible for 55% of the overall lung function. Lungs bring oxygen from the air into the bloodstream and expel carbon dioxide out of the body. When we breathe in through the nose, air passes through the larynx, trachea, bronchi, and bronchioles before reaching the alveoli. In the alveoli, gases are exchanged through diffusion, where oxygen is taken into the bloodstream and carbon dioxide is released out of the body through exhalation. Besides respiration, lungs regulate body temperature by releasing heat through breathing and help maintain the balance of acid and base by expelling carbon dioxide. The most common cause of lung cancer is smoking. Cigarettes contain over 200 substances that can cause lung cancer. More than 90% of lung cancer patients have a history of smoking, and the longer and more cigarettes smoked, the higher the risk of lung cancer. Smoking not only harms oneself but also indirectly damages others through secondhand smoke exposure, so quitting smoking is essential. The risk of lung cancer gradually decreases when quitting smoking, and starting at a younger age can reduce the risk to a level similar to non-smokers. Therefore, the importance of quitting smoking cannot be emphasized enough.