If you log in, you can enjoy even more diverse benefits. The circulation of blood flows through the body by circulating oxygen and nutrients, and collecting carbon dioxide and waste products through the heartbeat of the heart to circulate the lungs and the whole body. It is located throughout the body with blood vessels. Pulmonary circulation: right ventricle → pulmonary artery → pulmonary capillaries → pulmonary vein → left atrium Systemic circulation: left ventricle → aorta → systemic capillaries → vena cava → right atrium The blood circulation in the human body is divided into pulmonary circulation, which circulates through the lungs, and systemic circulation, which circulates the whole body. Its basic function is to supply the body with nutrients and oxygen and remove carbon dioxide and waste products. Pulmonary circulation involves the flow of blood rich in carbon dioxide and waste products into the right atrium and right ventricle, where gas exchange occurs in the pulmonary capillaries to receive oxygen and nutrients, and then enters the left atrium and left ventricle. Systemic circulation involves the release of oxygen and nutrient-rich arterial blood from the left ventricle. The pressure of arterial blood in the blood vessels is called blood pressure, and having lower blood pressure than usual means that there is not enough oxygen and nutrients supplied to the body tissues. From the aorta to the systemic capillaries of the body's organs, oxygen is supplied through gas exchange and carbon dioxide and waste products are received, then the blood returns to the heart through the vena cava into the right ventricle and right atrium, known as systemic circulation. The circulation of blood in a fetus that does not need to exchange gases through pulmonary circulation or absorb nutrients through the digestive tract differs from that of an adult. The fetus is connected to the mother's uterus through the umbilical cord and placenta, receiving oxygen and nutrients through a single umbilical vein and excreting carbon dioxide and waste products through two umbilical arteries. Most of the blood that enters the right atrium flows through the foramen ovale between the right atrium and left atrium, passes through the left ventricle and the left atrium to circulate through the body, while the rest of the blood in the right atrium flows out through the right ventricle and goes through a passage (ductus arteriosus) connecting the pulmonary vein and aorta to circulate through the body. The veins, arteries, and foramen ovale that assist the fetal circulation disappear after birth. Blood circulation enhancers are not therapeutic aids but are supplementary aids that improve mild blood circulation disorders. If a blood circulation disorder is suspected, accurate diagnosis and treatment by a doctor should take precedence.