If you log in, you can enjoy various benefits even more. Hormones are substances that are secreted into the blood and react by binding to specific target organs' receptors, acting to increase or decrease the speed of normal metabolic processes and maintaining the body's homeostasis. Endocrine organs are spread throughout the body, with the central regulator being the pituitary gland in the brain. Hormones are mostly composed of chemical compounds such as amino acids, steroids, and prostaglandins. Hormones are chemical substances secreted from various parts of the body such as the pituitary gland, thyroid, pancreas, adrenal glands, and reproductive organs, and they act specifically at target organs to regulate changes in the body and maintain homeostasis. Major regulatory functions include reproduction, growth and development, body defense against stress, maintaining balance of blood volume, electrolytes, and nutrients, cellular metabolism, and regulating energy balance. Pituitary gland: Part that secretes hormones that stimulate the secretion of each hormone.Thyroid gland: Secretes hormones that activate cells throughout the body and are involved in regulating body temperature, as well as the growth of the heart and digestive system. Adrenal glands: Organs that regulate blood glucose and maintain fluid balance. Pancreas: Responsible for receiving and breaking down glucose from the endocrine part known as the islets of Langerhans. Ovaries and testes: Ovaries secrete female hormones, while testes secrete male hormones. Hormones are regulated in the blood by a mechanism called negative feedback, which controls the amount of hormones that change within a narrow range. When stress or other stimuli affect the pituitary gland that regulates hormones, various functions may not function smoothly, leading to hormonal imbalances. Moreover, extreme dieting in a short period can also cause hormonal imbalances. Representative symptoms of hormonal imbalances include irregular menstrual cycles that were previously regular, rapid weight gain, high blood pressure, and cholesterol. Depression and sleep disorders may also occur, and benign tumors may develop in the uterus and ovaries. If hormonal imbalance is suspected, hormone testing through blood tests and consultation with a doctor is necessary.