If you log in, you can enjoy more benefits. The iris is a doughnut-shaped membrane around the pupil that regulates the amount of light entering the eye by contracting and dilating, controlling the size of the pupil. It is located inside the eye and between the cornea and the lens. The hole located in the center of the iris is called the pupil, and the iris acts as the diaphragm that adjusts the amount of light entering the eye. The iris is controlled by the iris sphincter and dilator muscles located inside the iris, causing the pupil to constrict and dilate. The color of the iris appears diverse due to the pigment layer inside the iris. There are many racial and individual differences, and differences can also occur between both eyes, and even within one eye, the color and pattern of the iris can appear differently. If the iris has a low pigment content, it appears bluish or grey, and if it has a high pigment content, it appears brown. In the case of Westerners, with a lower pigment content, their irises tend to allow more sunlight through, making them more sensitive to glare compared to Asians. In bright places, the iris relaxes causing the pupil to shrink, reducing the amount of light entering the eye, and in dim places, the iris contracts causing the pupil to enlarge, increasing the amount of light entering the eye. Heterochromia iridis, where the colors of both eyes are different, is known as heterochromia iridis, which is also referred to as "Odd-eye". It occurs when there is a difference in pigment content around the iris, resulting from excessive or insufficient iris pigmentation. This is distinctively seen in congenital genetic conditions such as Waardenburg syndrome, where different-colored irises appear, typically with one eye being brown and the other blue. It can also occur later on due to trauma, treatment of glaucoma, or medication. Inflammation of the iris can arise through infections, but can also be associated with conditions like ankylosing spondylitis, Behcet's disease, juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis, and others. Iris inflammation occurring in these conditions is a significant part of diagnosing the diseases.