If you log in, you can enjoy more benefits. The macula is the area in the retina of the eye where photoreceptor cells are densely packed to focus light most accurately. The cells in the macula of the retina are connected to nerve fibers that transmit visual information to the brain. Located at the center of the retina that covers the inside of the eye, the macula is the area of about 1.5mm in the central part of the retina. It is a thin layer where many cells are densely distributed in the fovea, the area where light enters through the cornea and lens to focus sharply. The fovea appears darker due to a higher density of pigmented cells than the surrounding parts, with a concentration of cone cells, which perceive color. Additionally, there are many rods and cones that have a significant impact on vision. The macula is responsible for central vision in the eye and is where light is focused. It receives visual information from the central part of the wide area of the retina located at the back of the eye, sending it to the brain to recognize objects, especially their brightness, color, and shape. Ultraviolet rays in sunlight, which are invisible to the eye, can have a harmful effect on the eyes with prolonged exposure because they carry high energy. Exposure to ultraviolet rays can damage both the cornea and conjunctiva that are exposed externally, so it is advisable to rest and see a doctor if there is no improvement. Ultraviolet rays can also affect the path of light passing through the eye, not only the surface of the eye but also the inside. In particular, ultraviolet rays reaching the macula through the lens can cause diseases like macular degeneration. The macula is the most sensitive part of the retina and plays a key role in determining vision. Age-related macular degeneration, a condition in which the microstructure of the macula changes and vision declines in people over 50, is a growing concern in South Korea. It is believed that ultraviolet rays and Westernized diets may be contributing factors to this condition. To prevent damage from ultraviolet rays, it is important to avoid exposure to them. It is recommended to avoid going out during strong UV radiation hours from 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. and if going outside is necessary, protecting the eyes from UV rays is crucial. Using a wide-brimmed hat and sunglasses with UV protection can help protect the eyes from ultraviolet rays.