By logging in, you can enjoy more benefits. The epiglottis is a structure that covers the entrance of the larynx, like a lid covering the entrance to a pot, preventing food from entering the airway. It is located at the front wall where the tongue ends and the larynx begins. The lower part of the larynx is where the esophagus meets the upper part of the larynx and the entrance to the airway. The entrance to the larynx has a epiglottis made of fibrous cartilage, which protrudes towards the side where the larynx is attached at the upper part of the larynx body. The epiglottis is made of soft cartilage that does not ossify throughout life and serves a function similar to a lid covering the larynx. Therefore, the size of the epiglottis is the size that can cover the larynx airway, and its size varies depending on the changes in the body related to age. If epiglottitis occurs, the tissue of the epiglottis may swell and block the airway. If the airway is blocked, it can lead to severe complications that threaten life due to lack of oxygen in the body, so if symptoms of epiglottitis occur, you must visit a hospital. The epiglottis, a part of the airway, remains open when breathing and closes the airway when swallowing food to prevent food, foreign objects, etc., from being aspirated into the airway. When food reaches the larynx, the epiglottis blocks the opening of the airway, and swallowing reflux occurs. It plays a very important role in regulating movements to prevent foreign objects from entering the airway. If this function is not performed properly, the contents of the esophagus may be aspirated into the lungs, leading to respiratory symptoms or gastroesophageal reflux symptoms. Type B Haemophilus influenzae causes diseases such as meningitis, septicemia, pneumonia, epiglottitis, and arthritis. Diseases caused by this virus are generally serious diseases, so vaccination is essential. Known as Hib vaccine, it is administered to children starting from 2 months of age, requiring 3-4 doses depending on the type of vaccine. Children under 5 years of age must be vaccinated with the Hib vaccine, but it should not be administered before 6 weeks of age. Infants, the elderly, and people with impaired swallowing reflex should always be cautious when swallowing even relatively small foods if the swallowing reflex is not functioning properly or the swallow reflex is immature or impaired.