If you log in, you can enjoy even more benefits. Located in the center of the neck, this organ performs the functions of respiration and vocalization. In males, the thyroid cartilage in the larynx protrudes and bends more in the central part, causing it to appear more prominent than in females, which is why it is called the Adam's apple. It is located between the middle of the neck, the hyoid bone, and the trachea. The larynx is composed of cartilage. The thyroid cartilage in the center of the neck covers the front part of the larynx and is shaped like a wide shield. Below the thyroid cartilage, there is the cricoid cartilage, which is divided into the upper part of the cricoid, the middle part of the cricoid, and the lower part of the cricoid. The upper part of the cricoid refers to the upper part of the larynx from the tip of the epiglottis to the true vocal cords. The middle part of the cricoid is mainly where phonation occurs, from the true vocal cords to about 5-7mm below. The lower part of the cricoid refers to the lowermost part of the middle part of the cricoid where the trachea begins. Other cartilages such as the epiglottis, arytenoid cartilage, corniculate cartilage, cuneiform cartilage also make up the larynx. The larynx is located between the pharynx and the trachea, connecting the airflow. The pharynx is a passage through which both food and air pass. They are separated into the larynx and the esophagus, protecting against food or foreign bodies entering the airway. The vocal cords that produce sound play an important role in phonation. In males, the angle at which the central part of the cartilage bends is steeper than in females, and the cartilage protrudes more, resulting in a longer middle part of the cricoid, giving males a thicker, lower voice compared to females. A characteristic symptom of laryngeal cancer is a hoarse voice. If a tumor develops on the vocal cords that produce sound, making them move abnormally, a hoarse voice may occur. Therefore, if you experience symptoms of your voice changing, it is advisable to see a doctor.