If you log in, you can enjoy even more various benefits. It refers to the space inside the chest cavity, where organs such as the lungs and heart are located. Located in the chest area, it refers to the interior of the chest cavity. The chest cavity is a body space protected by the thoracic wall, including ribs, muscles, and fascia. Organs such as the cardiovascular system, respiratory system, digestive system, endocrine system, and nervous system are located in the chest cavity. When the chest cavity experiences impact, damage may occur not only inside the chest but also in the back, spine, and neck. The cardiovascular system organs such as the heart, aorta, pulmonary arteries and their branches, superior and inferior vena cava, pulmonary veins, and brachiocephalic vein are located in the chest cavity. The respiratory system organs such as the diaphragm, bronchi, bronchioles, and lungs are located in the chest cavity. The digestive system organs such as the esophagus are located in the chest cavity, as well as endocrine organs like the thymus gland. Nervous system organs such as the vagus nerve and sympathetic nerve fibers are located in the chest cavity. The chest cavity undergoes respiratory movements as it changes in size due to the movement of the diaphragm. When the diaphragm and intercostal muscles relax, the chest cavity expands, air enters the lungs, and conversely, when they contract, the chest cavity narrows and air exits the lungs. A procedure where a small incision is made in the chest cavity to observe the inside using an inserted endoscope is called thoracoscopy, allowing surgeons to view and perform surgery inside the chest cavity through lens-equipped instruments. In contrast, thoracotomy is a method of cutting through the chest wall to access organs such as the lungs and heart for surgical treatment, mostly by cutting through the breastbone to access the chest cavity. Although it provides a wide surgical field of view, a disadvantage is that it can leave a large scar after surgery.