If you log in, you can enjoy more benefits. The pleura refers to the two layers of membrane that wrap around the lungs, centered around the lungs extending outwards. It consists of the visceral pleura surrounding the lungs and the parietal pleura lining the inner chest wall. The space between the visceral and parietal pleura is called the pleural cavity, which helps in the expansion and contraction of the lungs. This double-layered structure starts at the hilum of the lungs, where the trachea divides into the lungs, and surrounds the surface of the lungs with the visceral pleura and the inner chest wall with the parietal pleura. The parietal pleura covers the mediastinum, diaphragm, and thoracic cage as a whole. It is composed of a single layer of epithelial cells, intricately folded irregular connective tissue.

The visceral pleura is thicker than the parietal pleura, consisting of two layers of epithelial cells and connective tissue layers, which is related to the movement of substances through the pleura. Only the parietal pleura in the chest wall and diaphragm area has sensory nerves, so pain can be felt when the chest wall and diaphragm are stimulated, but sensation originating from the lungs cannot be felt. The pleura, along with the pleural cavity, also functions to reduce friction during respiratory movements between the lungs and the chest wall. The lubricant present between the two layers of membrane reduces resistance when the lungs expand and contract.

Various particles, movement of white blood cells, generation of inflammatory substances, and fibrous tissue formation occur through the epithelial cells of the pleura. A small amount of body fluid flows evenly from the capillaries in the parietal pleura into the pleural cavity. However, if there is an increase in fluid production or a decrease in fluid absorption, leading to more fluid being produced than absorbed in the pleura, pleural effusion may occur. Generally, if there are no symptoms or the amount is minimal, pleural effusions can be observed without removal, but in some cases, a small amount of pleural fluid may be drained for diagnostic purposes.