If you log in, you can enjoy even more benefits. It is a structure that occupies the middle part of the spine. It is vertically located on the upper back of the trunk, between the cervical and lumbar spine. It consists of a total of 12 spinal bones, and as the spine descends from top to bottom, the size of the vertebral bodies increases. The size of the thoracic vertebra is intermediate between the cervical and lumbar vertebrae. The individual sizes of thoracic vertebrae differ as well, with the first thoracic vertebra being much smaller than the twelfth thoracic vertebra. Unlike other spinal structures, the thoracic vertebrae have articular surfaces connecting to the heads of the ribs on the side of the vertebral bodies and forming joint surfaces that connect to the costal facets on the transverse processes of the thoracic vertebrae, except for the eleventh and twelfth thoracic vertebrae. Thoracic vertebrae close to the cervical spine have a shape similar to the cervical vertebrae, while those close to the lumbar spine have a shape similar to the lumbar vertebrae. The first thoracic vertebra has joints with the heads of the first ribs on both sides of the spinal bodies, and the first thoracic nerve extends below the first thoracic vertebra. The second to eighth thoracic vertebrae form ball-and-socket joints between the lower part of one vertebral body and the upper part of the next vertebral body, meeting one rib, with the intercostal nerves extending between each thoracic vertebra. The eleventh and twelfth thoracic vertebrae are sturdier and thicker than the other thoracic vertebrae, resembling the shape of the lumbar vertebrae. Although each thoracic vertebra has limited range of motion, the thoracic spine as a whole has a large range of motion. It can bend the chest forward about 30-40 degrees and extend backward about 20-25 degrees. It can also rotate approximately 30 degrees to the left and right from the center. The thoracic vertebrae are less mobile than other vertebrae due to the ribs supporting the thoracic cage. The thoracic vertebrae, together with the intercostal muscles, protect internal organs such as the lungs, heart, stomach, liver in the thoracic cavity, facilitate respiration, and help support the muscles that can support the head stably. Due to frequent use of computers and mobile phones, more people are developing hunched backs instead of straight backs for a good posture. If the upper part of the back (thoracic region) becomes hunched, weakening of the muscles in the neck, sides of the abdomen, and back of the thighs can occur. Let's try the following corrective exercises to create a straight and beautiful back posture: 1. Shoulder Blade Squeeze Sit in a chair, interlock your fingers behind your head, and squeeze your elbows together. Straighten both elbows while squeezing the shoulder blades on the back. Repeat 10 times, 3 sets. 2. Side Lying Trunk Rotation Lie on your side, extend both arms forward, and clasp your hands together. Bend the knee of the leg on top forward towards your body while keeping the lower body stable. Keeping the legs fixed, pass the upper hand behind the torso and rotate the upper body back. Repeat 10 times, 3 sets.