If you log in, you can enjoy even more benefits. The thymus, located in front of the mediastinum in the chest area, is an immune organ that generates T lymphocytes. The thymus grows the most during adolescence and then gradually degenerates as one becomes an adult. Located in the center of the chest, right behind the sternum in the middle of the chest bone, between the lungs on either side, and in front of the heart, the thymus is an immune system organ shaped like a butterfly that is largest in size compared to body weight immediately after birth and gradually decreases in size as one becomes an adult. The thymus, which consists of two lobes shaped like triangles, grows to about 30-40g during adolescence, then loses its function as it grows and is mostly replaced by fat tissue. The decrease in thymus size continues throughout life, and by the time one reaches their 70s, it decreases to about 6g. As the thymus size decreases, its function also declines. The thymus is composed of an outer cortex and an inner medulla. Immature lymphocytes from the bone marrow mature and differentiate into T lymphocytes in the cortex before moving to the medulla. These lymphocytes then enter the blood vessels to carry out immune functions in the bloodstream. The body's immune system serves to defend against diseases and is primarily formed during childhood, involving the thymus, bone marrow, spleen, lymph nodes, and white blood cells. The skin, which acts as a protective barrier to prevent substances from entering from the outside, and the intestines, which filter out bacteria from food, are also part of the immune system. The immune system of the body is always on alert to quickly and safely eliminate the causes of diseases (bacteria, viruses, fungi, toxins, etc.) that invade from the outside. Among these, the thymus plays a crucial role in maturing T lymphocytes, essential for the development of a normal immune system. As one ages, the thymus gradually shrinks and remains primarily as a site where T lymphocytes mature. Especially, T cells released from the thymus respond to external antigens and are programmed not to attack their own tissue. Therefore, it is presumed that they have the function of destroying lymphocytes that cause autoimmune responses (immune responses against normal tissues in the body) and non-self cells and waste. The thymus grows from infancy, peaks during adolescence, then gradually degenerates, eventually being replaced by fat tissue. However, in cases where the thymus abnormally shrinks or enlarges, severe muscle weakness or tumors can occur. In the case of adults, removing the thymus due to various diseases does not have a significant impact, but in newborns, removing the thymus can lead to a drastic decrease in T-cells, resulting in the collapse of the immune system and the onset of other diseases.