An abdominal aortic aneurysm occurs when a lower part of the body's main artery, called the aorta, becomes weakened and bulges.An abdominal aortic aneurysm is an enlarged area in the lower part of the body's main artery, called the aorta. The aorta runs from the heart through the center of the chest and belly area, called the abdomen.The aorta is the largest blood vessel in the body. An abdominal aortic aneurysm that ruptures can cause life-threatening bleeding.Treatment depends on the size of the aneurysm and how fast it's growing. Treatment varies from regular health checkups and imaging tests to emergency surgery.Abdominal aortic aneurysms often grow slowly without noticeable symptoms. This makes them difficult to detect. Some aneurysms never rupture. Many start small and stay small. Others grow larger over time, sometimes quickly.If you have a growing abdominal aortic aneurysm, you might notice:If you have pain, especially if pain is sudden and severe, seek medical help right away.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesAneurysms can develop anywhere along the aorta. Most aortic aneurysms occur in the part of the aorta that's in the belly area, called the abdomen. Several things can lead to the development of an abdominal aortic aneurysm, including:Abdominal aortic aneurysm risk factors include:If you're at risk of an aortic aneurysm, medicines may be given to lower your blood pressure and relieve stress on weakened arteries.Complications of abdominal aortic aneurysms include:A rupture can cause life-threatening internal bleeding. In general, the larger the aneurysm and the faster it grows, the greater the risk of rupture.Symptoms that an aortic aneurysm has ruptured can include:Aortic aneurysms also increase the risk of developing blood clots in the area. If a blood clot breaks loose from the inside wall of an aneurysm, it can block a blood vessel elsewhere in the body. Symptoms of a blocked blood vessel may include pain or reduced blood flow to the legs, toes, kidneys or belly area.To prevent an abdominal aortic aneurysm or to keep one from worsening, do the following:Abdominal aortic aneurysm care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Aortic Aneurysms support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.433 Replies Tue, Jun 11, 2024 501 Replies Mon, Jun 10, 2024 250 Replies Fri, May 24, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Hardening of the arteries, called atherosclerosis.High blood pressure.Blood vessel diseases.Infection in the aorta.Trauma.Tobacco use.Age.Being male.Being white.Family history.Other aneurysms.Don't smoke or use tobacco products.Eat a healthy diet.Keep your blood pressure and cholesterol under control.Get regular exercise.Advertising & Sponsorship