Absence seizures involve brief, sudden lapses of consciousness. They're more common in children than in adults.A person having an absence seizure may stare blankly into space for a few seconds. Then the person typically returns quickly to being alert. This type of seizure usually doesn't lead to physical injury. But injury can result during the period when the person loses consciousness. This is particularly true if someone is driving a car or riding a bike when the seizure happens.Absence seizures usually can be controlled with anti-seizure medicines. Some children who have them also develop other seizures, such as generalized tonic-clonic seizures or myoclonic seizures. Many children outgrow absence seizures in their teens.A simple absence seizure causes a vacant stare, which may be mistaken for a brief lapse in attention. The seizure lasts about 10 seconds, though it may last as long as 30 seconds. There's no confusion, headache or drowsiness after the seizure.Symptoms of absence seizures include:Afterward, there's usually no memory of the incident. But if the seizure is longer, the person may be aware of missed time. Some people have many episodes daily. When it happens, it can interfere with school or daily activities.A child may have absence seizures for some time before an adult notices them. This is because the seizures are so brief. A decline in a child's learning ability may be the first sign of the seizure disorder. Teachers may say the child has trouble paying attention or that a child is often daydreaming.Contact your child's pediatrician:Contact 911 or emergency services in your area:Absence seizures usually have a genetic cause.In general, seizures occur as a result of a burst of electrical impulses from nerve cells in the brain, called neurons. Neurons typically send electrical and chemical signals across the synapses that connect them.In people who have seizures, the brain's usual electrical activity is altered. During an absence seizure, these electrical signals repeat themselves over and over in a three-second pattern.People who have seizures also may have altered levels of the chemical messengers that help the nerve cells communicate with one another. These chemical messengers are called neurotransmitters.Certain factors are common to children who have absence seizures, including:While most children outgrow absence seizures, some:Other complications can include:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Age.Sex.Family members who have seizures.Advertising & Sponsorship