Achalasia is a swallowing condition that affects the tube connecting the mouth and the stomach, called the esophagus. Damaged nerves make it hard for the muscles of the esophagus to squeeze food and liquid into the stomach. Food then collects in the esophagus, sometimes fermenting and washing back up into the mouth. This fermented food can taste bitter.Achalasia is a fairly rare condition. Some people mistake it for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). However, in achalasia, the food is coming from the esophagus. In GERD, the material comes from the stomach.There's no cure for achalasia. Once the esophagus is damaged, the muscles cannot work properly again. But symptoms can usually be managed with endoscopy, minimally invasive therapy or surgery.Achalasia symptoms generally appear gradually and get worse over time. Symptoms may include:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care.If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe exact cause of achalasia is poorly understood. Researchers suspect that it may be caused by a loss of nerve cells in the esophagus. There are theories about what causes this, but viral infection or autoimmune responses are possibilities. Very rarely, achalasia may be caused by an inherited genetic disorder or infection.Risk factors for achalasia include:Achalasia care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Age.Certain medical conditions.Advertising & Sponsorship