The Achilles tendon is a strong fibrous cord that connects the muscles in the back of your calf to your heel bone. If you overstretch your Achilles tendon, it can tear (rupture).Achilles (uh-KILL-eez) tendon rupture is an injury that affects the back of your lower leg. It mainly occurs in people playing recreational sports, but it can happen to anyone.The Achilles tendon is a strong fibrous cord that connects the muscles in the back of your calf to your heel bone. If you overstretch your Achilles tendon, it can tear (rupture) completely or just partially.If your Achilles tendon ruptures, you might hear a pop, followed by an immediate sharp pain in the back of your ankle and lower leg that is likely to affect your ability to walk properly. Surgery is often performed to repair the rupture. For many people, however, nonsurgical treatment works just as well.Although it's possible to have no signs or symptoms with an Achilles tendon rupture, most people have:Seek medical advice immediately if you hear a pop in your heel, especially if you can't walk properly afterward.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesYour Achilles tendon helps you point your foot downward, rise on your toes and push off your foot as you walk. You rely on it virtually every time you walk and move your foot.Rupture usually occurs in the section of the tendon situated within 2 1/2 inches (about 6 centimeters) of the point where it attaches to the heel bone. This section might be prone to rupture because blood flow is poor, which also can impair its ability to heal.Ruptures often are caused by a sudden increase in the stress on your Achilles tendon. Common examples include:Factors that may increase your risk of Achilles tendon rupture include:Your Achilles tendon connects the muscles in the back of your leg to your heel bone. The calf stretch exercise can help prevent an Achilles tendon rupture. To do the stretch, follow these steps: 1. Stand at arm's length from a wall or a sturdy piece of exercise equipment. Put your palms flat against the wall or hold on to the piece of equipment. 2. Keep one leg back with your knee straight and your heel flat on the floor. 3. Slowly bend your elbows and front knee and move your hips forward until you feel a stretch in your calf. 4. Hold this position for 30 to 60 seconds. 5. Switch leg positions and repeat with your other leg.To reduce your chance of developing Achilles tendon problems, follow these tips:Our patients tell us that the quality of their interactions, our attention to detail and the efficiency of their visits mean health care like they've never experienced. See the stories of satisfied Mayo Clinic patients.When people retire, they often plan to spend more time with their grandkids, or on activities like volunteering, gardening, traveling and hobbies. Christine Brown came up with something far more epic. After thinking about what she and her husband, Tom, enjoyed doing together, she proposed that they spend the next five years hiking the 2,190 miles of the Appalachian Trail (AT). Stretching from Springer Mountain, Georgia, to Katahdin, Maine, it's the longest hiking-only trail in…Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Age.Sex.Recreational sports.Steroid injections.Certain antibiotics.Obesity.Stretch and strengthen calf muscles.Vary your exercises.Choose running surfaces carefully.Increase training intensity slowly.Advertising & Sponsorship