An acoustic neuroma, also known as a vestibular schwannoma, is a noncancerous tumor. It develops on the balance nerve, known as the vestibular nerve, and on the auditory nerve, known as the cochlear nerve. These nerves lead from your inner ear to the brain, as shown in the top image. The pressure on the nerve from the tumor may cause hearing loss and imbalance. In some cases, the tumor may grow and affect the cerebellum or other brain tissues, as shown in the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan and illustrations above.An acoustic neuroma is a noncancerous tumor that develops on the main nerve leading from the inner ear to the brain. This nerve is called the vestibular nerve. Branches of the nerve directly affect balance and hearing. Pressure from an acoustic neuroma can cause hearing loss, ringing in the ear and problems with balance. Another name for an acoustic neuroma is vestibular schwannoma.An acoustic neuroma develops from the Schwann cells covering the vestibular nerve. An acoustic neuroma is usually slow-growing. Rarely, it may grow quickly and become large enough to press against the brain and affect vital functions.Treatments for an acoustic neuroma include monitoring, radiation and surgical removal.Symptoms of an acoustic neuroma are often easy to miss and may take years to develop. Symptoms may occur because of the tumor's effects on the hearing and balance nerves. The tumor also can put pressure on nearby nerves controlling facial muscles, known as the facial nerve, and sensation, known as the trigeminal nerve. Blood vessels or brain structures also can be affected by an acoustic neuroma.As the tumor grows, it may be more likely to cause more noticeable or worse symptoms.Common symptoms of an acoustic neuroma include:Rarely, an acoustic neuroma may grow large enough to compress the brainstem and become life-threatening.See a health care professional if you notice hearing loss in one ear, ringing in your ear or balance problems.Early diagnosis of an acoustic neuroma may help keep the tumor from growing large enough to cause complications such as total hearing loss.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and receive the latest on brain tumor treatment, diagnosis and surgery.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You will receive the first brain tumor email in your inbox shortly, which will include information on treatment, diagnosis, surgery and how brain cancer teams at Mayo Clinic approach personalized care.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe cause of acoustic neuromas can sometimes be linked to a problem with a gene on chromosome 22. Typically, this gene produces a tumor suppressor protein that helps control the growth of Schwann cells covering the nerves.Experts don't know what causes this problem with the gene. Often there is no known cause for an acoustic neuroma. This gene change is inherited in people with a rare disorder called neurofibromatosis type 2. People with neurofibromatosis type 2 usually have growth of tumors on the hearing and balance nerves on both sides of the head. These tumors are known as bilateral vestibular schwannomas.In an autosomal dominant disorder, the changed gene is a dominant gene. It's located on one of the nonsex chromosomes, called autosomes. Only one changed gene is needed for someone to be affected by this type of condition. A person with an autosomal dominant condition — in this example, the father — has a 50% chance of having an affected child with one changed gene and a 50% chance of having an unaffected child.The only confirmed risk factor for acoustic neuromas is having a parent with the rare genetic disorder neurofibromatosis type 2. However, neurofibromatosis type 2 only accounts for about 5% of acoustic neuroma cases.A hallmark characteristic of neurofibromatosis type 2 is noncancerous tumors on the balance nerves on both sides of the head. Tumors also may develop on other nerves.Neurofibromatosis type 2 is known as an autosomal dominant disorder. This means that the gene related to the disorder can be passed to a child by just one parent. Each child of an affected parent has a 50-50 chance of inheriting it.An acoustic neuroma may cause permanent complications, including:Large tumors may press on the brainstem, occasionally preventing the flow of cerebrospinal fluid between the brain and spinal cord. Fluid can build up in your head, a condition known as hydrocephalus. This increases the pressure inside the skull.Acoustic neuroma care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Brain Tumor support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.172 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 1 Replies Tue, Jun 04, 2024 6 Replies Sun, May 26, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship