An actinic keratosis (ak-TIN-ik ker-uh-TOE-sis) is a rough, scaly patch on the skin that develops from years of sun exposure. It's often found on the face, lips, ears, forearms, scalp, neck or back of the hands. Actinic keratoses are scaly spots or patches on the top layer of skin. With time they may become hard with a wartlike surface. Also known as a solar keratosis, an actinic keratosis grows slowly and usually first appears in people over 40. You can reduce your risk of this skin condition by minimizing your sun exposure and protecting your skin from ultraviolet (UV) rays.Left untreated, the risk of actinic keratoses turning into a type of skin cancer called squamous cell carcinoma is about 5% to 10%.Actinic keratoses vary in appearance. Symptoms include:It can be difficult to distinguish between noncancerous spots and cancerous ones. So it's best to have new skin changes evaluated by a health care provider — especially if a scaly spot or patch persists, grows or bleeds.An actinic keratosis is caused by frequent or intense exposure to ultraviolet (UV) rays from the sun or tanning beds.Anyone can develop actinic keratoses. But you're at increased risk if you:If treated early, actinic keratosis can be cleared up or removed. If left untreated, some of these spots might progress to squamous cell carcinoma. This is a type of cancer that usually isn't life-threatening if detected and treated early.Sun safety helps prevent actinic keratoses. Take these steps to protect your skin from the sun:Use sunscreen. Before spending time outdoors, apply a broad-spectrum water-resistant sunscreen with a sun protection factor (SPF) of at least 30, as the American Academy of Dermatology recommends. Do this even on cloudy days.Use sunscreen on all exposed skin. And use lip balm with sunscreen on your lips. Apply sunscreen at least 15 minutes before going outside and reapply it every two hours — or more often if you're swimming or sweating.Sunscreen is not recommended for babies under 6 months. Rather, keep them out of the sun if possible. Or protect them with shade, hats, and clothing that covers the arms and legs.Dec 17, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.