Acute flaccid myelitis (AFM) is a rare but serious condition that affects the spinal cord. It can cause sudden weakness in the arms or legs, loss of muscle tone, and loss of reflexes. The condition mainly affects young children.Most children have a mild respiratory illness or fever caused by a viral infection about one to four weeks before developing symptoms of acute flaccid myelitis.If you or your child develops symptoms of acute flaccid myelitis, seek immediate medical care. Symptoms can progress rapidly. Hospitalization is needed and sometimes a ventilator is required for breathing support.Since experts began tracking acute flaccid myelitis following initial clusters in 2014, outbreaks in the United States have occurred in 2016 and 2018. Outbreaks tend to occur between August and November.The most common signs and symptoms of acute flaccid myelitis include:Other possible signs and symptoms include:Uncommon symptoms might include:Severe symptoms involve respiratory failure, due to the muscles involved in breathing becoming weak. It's also possible to experience life-threatening body temperature changes and blood pressure instability.If you or your child has any of the signs or symptoms listed above, seek medical care as soon as possible.Acute flaccid myelitis might be caused by an infection with a type of virus known as an enterovirus. Respiratory illnesses and fever from enteroviruses are common — especially in children. Most people recover. It's not clear why some people with an enterovirus infection develop acute flaccid myelitis.In the United States many viruses, including enteroviruses, circulate between August and November. This is when acute flaccid myelitis outbreaks tend to occur.The symptoms of acute flaccid myelitis can look similar to those of the viral disease polio. But none of the acute flaccid myelitis cases in the United States have been caused by poliovirus.Acute flaccid myelitis mainly affects young children.Muscle weakness caused by acute flaccid myelitis can continue for months to years.There's no specific way to prevent acute flaccid myelitis. However, preventing a viral infection can help reduce the risk of developing acute flaccid myelitis.Take these steps to help protect yourself or your child from getting or spreading a viral infection:Nov 09, 2021CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.