Acute liver failure is loss of liver function that occurs quickly — in days or weeks — usually in a person who has no preexisting liver disease. It's most commonly caused by a hepatitis virus or drugs, such as acetaminophen. Acute liver failure is less common than chronic liver failure, which develops more slowly.Acute liver failure, also known as fulminant hepatic failure, can cause serious complications, including bleeding and increased pressure in the brain. It's a medical emergency that requires hospitalization.Depending on the cause, acute liver failure can sometimes be reversed with treatment. In many situations, though, a liver transplant may be the only cure.Signs and symptoms of acute liver failure may include:Acute liver failure can develop quickly in an otherwise healthy person, and it is life-threatening. If you or someone you know suddenly develops a yellowing of the eyes or skin; tenderness in the upper abdomen; or any unusual changes in mental state, personality or behavior, seek medical attention right away.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesAcute liver failure occurs when liver cells are damaged significantly and are no longer able to function. Potential causes include:Acetaminophen overdose. Taking too much acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) is the most common cause of acute liver failure in the United States. Outside of the United States, acetaminophen is known as paracetamol. Acute liver failure can occur after one very large dose of acetaminophen, or after higher than recommended doses every day for several days.If you or someone you know has taken an overdose of acetaminophen, seek medical attention as quickly as possible. Treatment may prevent liver failure. Don't wait for the signs of liver failure.Some cases of acute liver failure have no obvious cause.Acute liver failure often causes complications, including:Reduce your risk of acute liver failure by taking care of your liver.Our patients tell us that the quality of their interactions, our attention to detail and the efficiency of their visits mean health care like they've never experienced. See the stories of satisfied Mayo Clinic patients.Jerry Costello holds his first great-great-grandchild, Colt Keen. Jerry Costello has spent a lifetime serving his community and country. After retiring, the southwestern Illinois native was looking forward to a new chapter. He started his own business and enjoyed more time at home with his family. But in 2017, Jerry noticed weight gain without a change in diet. "I went to my doctor for my annual physical and underwent a series of tests, but had…Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Transplants support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.1606 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 15 Replies Fri, Jun 21, 2024 100 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Acetaminophen overdose.Prescription medications.Herbal supplements.Hepatitis and other viruses.Toxins.Autoimmune disease.Diseases of the veins in the liver.Metabolic disease.Cancer.Shock.Heat stroke.Too much fluid in the brain (cerebral edema).Bleeding and bleeding disorders.Infections.Kidney failure.Follow instructions on medications.Tell your provider about all your medicines.Drink alcohol in moderation, if at all.Avoid risky behavior.Get vaccinated.Avoid contact with other people's blood and body fluids.Don't eat wild mushrooms.Take care with aerosol sprays.Watch what gets on your skin.Maintain a healthy weight.Advertising & Sponsorship