Acute sinusitis causes the spaces inside the nose, known as sinuses, to become inflamed and swollen. Acute sinusitis makes it hard for the sinuses to drain. Mucus builds up.Acute sinusitis can make it hard to breathe through the nose. The area around the eyes and the face might feel swollen. There might be throbbing face pain or a headache.The common cold is the usual cause of acute sinusitis. Most often, the condition clears up within a week to 10 days unless there's also an infection caused by bacteria, called a bacterial infection. Home remedies might be all that's needed to treat acute sinusitis. Sinusitis that lasts more than 12 weeks even with medical treatment is called chronic sinusitis.Acute sinusitis symptoms often include:Other signs and symptoms include:Most people with acute sinusitis don't need to see a health care provider.Contact your health care provider if you have any of the following:See a health care provider immediately if you have symptoms that might mean a serious infection:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesSinuses are cavities around nasal passages. If the sinuses become inflamed and swollen, a person may develop sinusitis.Acute sinusitis is most often caused by the common cold. Signs and symptoms may include a blocked and stuffy (congested) nose, which may block your sinuses and prevent drainage of mucus.Acute sinusitis is an infection caused by a virus. The common cold is most often the cause. Sometimes, sinuses that are blocked for a time might get a bacterial infection.The following can raise the risk of getting sinusitis:Acute sinusitis doesn't often cause complications. Complications that might happen include:Take these steps to help lower your risk of getting acute sinusitis:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Contact your health care providerSee a health care provider immediatelyHay fever or another allergyA common coldA problem inside the nose,A medical conditionBeing around smoke,Chronic sinusitis.Meningitis.Other infections.Vision problems.Stay well.Manage allergies.Avoid cigarette smoke and polluted air.Use a machine that adds moisture to the air, known as a humidifier.Advertising & Sponsorship