Adult Still disease is a rare type of inflammatory arthritis. Common symptoms are fevers, rash and joint pain. The condition can occur in some people as a single episode that goes away. In other people, the condition doesn't go away, or it goes away but comes back.Adult Still disease can damage joints, particularly the wrists. Treatment involves medicine to reduce pain and help control the disease. Prednisone is often used if pain relievers such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) are not enough.Most people with adult Still disease have a combination of the following symptoms:Symptoms of this disorder can differ from person to person. They can mimic those of other conditions, including lupus and a type of cancer called lymphoma.If you have a high fever, rash and achy joints, see your health care provider. Also, if you have adult Still disease and develop a cough, difficulty breathing, chest pain or any other symptoms that are not usual, call your health care provider.The cause of adult Still disease is not known. Some researchers suspect it might be triggered by a viral or bacterial infection.Age is the main risk factor for adult Still disease. It is most likely to occur in adults between the ages of 15 and 25 and between the ages of 36 and 46. Males and females are equally at risk.Adult Still disease inflames the organs and joints. Most complications from the disease result from this inflammation.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Fever.Rash.Sore throat.Achy and swollen joints.Muscle pain.Joint destruction.Inflammation of the heart.Excess fluid around the lungs.Macrophage activation syndrome.Advertising & Sponsorship