Airplane ear (ear barotrauma) is the stress on your eardrum that occurs when the air pressure in your middle ear and the air pressure in the environment are out of balance. You might get airplane ear when on an airplane that's climbing after takeoff or descending for landing.Airplane ear is also called ear barotrauma, barotitis media or aerotitis media.Self-care steps — such as yawning, swallowing or chewing gum — usually can counter the differences in air pressure and improve airplane ear symptoms. However, for a severe case of airplane ear, you might need to see a doctor.Airplane ear can occur in one or both ears. Common signs and symptoms include:If airplane ear is severe, you might have:If discomfort, fullness or muffled hearing lasts more than a few days, or if you have severe signs or symptoms, call your doctor.Airplane ear occurs when the air pressure in the middle ear and the air pressure in the environment don't match, preventing your eardrum (tympanic membrane) from vibrating normally. A narrow passage called the eustachian tube, which is connected to the middle ear, regulates air pressure. The middle ear has three small bones — the hammer, or malleus; the anvil, or incus; and the stirrup, or stapes. The eardrum keeps the bones away from the outer ear. A narrow path called the eustachian tube joins the middle ear to the back of the nose and upper part of the throat. The cochlea, a snail-shaped structure, is part of your inner ear. When an airplane climbs or descends, the air pressure changes rapidly. The eustachian tube often can't react fast enough, which causes the symptoms of airplane ear. Swallowing or yawning opens the eustachian tube and allows the middle ear to get more air, equalizing the air pressure. Airplane ear happens when there is an imbalance in the air pressure in your middle ear and the air pressure in the environment. This may happen when you’re in an airplane that is climbing or descending. A narrow passage called the eustachian tube regulates air pressure in your ear. When a plane climbs or descends, the air pressure changes quickly, and your eustachian tube often doesn’t react quickly enough. This can trigger airplane ear. Ear barotrauma can also be caused by:You may also experience a minor case of barotrauma while riding an elevator in a tall building or driving in the mountains.Any condition that blocks the eustachian tube or limits its function can increase the risk of airplane ear. Common risk factors include:Airplane ear usually isn't serious and responds to self-care. Long-term complications can rarely occur when the condition is serious or prolonged or if there's damage to middle or inner ear structures.Rare complications may include:Follow these tips to avoid airplane ear:If you're prone to severe airplane ear and must fly often or if you're having hyperbaric oxygen therapy to heal wounds, your doctor might surgically place tubes in your eardrums to aid fluid drainage, ventilate your middle ear, and equalize the pressure between your outer ear and middle ear. In a Valsalva maneuver, you gently blow your nose while pinching your nostrils and keeping your mouth closed. To help young children:Aug 21, 2021CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.