Alcohol poisoning is a serious — and sometimes deadly — result of drinking large amounts of alcohol in a short period of time. Drinking too much too quickly can affect breathing, heart rate, body temperature and gag reflex. In some cases, this can lead to a coma and death.Alcohol poisoning also can occur when adults or children accidentally or intentionally drink household products that contain alcohol.If you think that someone has alcohol poisoning, get medical attention right away.Alcohol poisoning symptoms include:It's not necessary to have all the above symptoms before seeking medical help. A person with alcohol poisoning who has passed out or can't wake up could die.If you think that someone has alcohol poisoning, seek medical care right away. This is true even if you don't see the usual signs.Here's what to do:It can be hard to decide if you think someone is drunk enough to need medical help. But it's best to take action right away rather than be sorry later. You may worry about what will happen to you or a friend or family member, especially if underage. But the results of not getting help in time can be far more serious.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesAlcohol in the form of ethanol, also called ethyl alcohol, is in alcoholic beverages. It's also in mouthwash, some cooking extracts, some medicines and certain household products. Ethyl alcohol poisoning generally results from drinking too many alcoholic beverages in a short period of time.Other forms of alcohol can cause toxic poisoning that requires emergency treatment. They include:A major cause of alcohol poisoning is binge drinking. This is when a male rapidly consumes five or more alcoholic drinks within two hours or a female consumes at least four drinks within two hours. An alcohol binge can occur over hours or last up to several days.A person can consume a fatal dose of alcohol before passing out. Even when the person is unconscious or stops drinking, the stomach and intestines continue to release alcohol into the bloodstream, and the level of alcohol in the body continues to rise.Unlike food, which can take hours to digest, the body absorbs alcohol quickly — long before most other nutrients. And it takes a lot more time for the body to get rid of alcohol. Most alcohol is processed by the liver.The more you drink, especially in a short period of time, the greater your risk of alcohol poisoning.Here's what one drink means.But the amount of alcohol in one drink may be much higher than those in the list above. For example, some craft beers may have four times the amount of alcohol that's in a regular beer. Alcohol content is displayed on the label. Or you can ask the server about alcohol content. Be aware of the alcohol content of what you're drinking and adjust how much you drink based on this knowledge.Mixed drinks may contain more than one serving of alcohol.Several factors can increase your risk of alcohol poisoning, including:Severe complications can result from alcohol poisoning, including:To avoid alcohol poisoning:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Call 911Be prepared to give information.Don't leave an unconscious person alone.Help someone who is vomiting.Beer:Malt liquor:Wine:Liquor such as gin, rum, vodka or whiskey:Choking.Stopping breathing.Severe loss of fluids.Seizures.Hypothermia.Unusual heartbeat.Brain damage.Death.Drink alcohol in moderation, if at all.Don't drink alcohol along with certain medicines.Don't drink on an empty stomach.Communicate with your teens.Store products safely.Get follow-up care.Advertising & Sponsorship