The liver is the largest internal organ in the body. It's about the size of a football. It sits mainly in the upper right portion of the stomach area, above the stomach.Alcoholic hepatitis is swelling, called inflammation, of the liver caused by drinking alcohol. Drinking alcohol destroys liver cells.Alcoholic hepatitis most often happens in people who drink heavily over many years. But the link between drinking and alcoholic hepatitis isn't simple. Not all heavy drinkers get alcoholic hepatitis. And some people who drink much less get the disease.If you're diagnosed with alcoholic hepatitis, you must stop drinking alcohol. People who keep drinking alcohol have a high risk of serious liver damage and death.The most common sign of alcoholic hepatitis is yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes, called jaundice. The yellowing of the skin might be harder to see on Black and brown people.Other symptoms include:People with alcoholic hepatitis tend to be malnourished. Drinking large amounts of alcohol keeps people from being hungry. And heavy drinkers get most of their calories from alcohol.Other symptoms that happen with severe alcoholic hepatitis include:Alcoholic hepatitis is a serious, often deadly disease.See a healthcare professional if you:Alcoholic hepatitis is caused by damage to the liver from drinking alcohol. Just how alcohol damages the liver and why it does so only in some heavy drinkers isn't clear.These factors are known to play a role in alcoholic hepatitis:Other factors that can be involved with alcoholic hepatitis include:The major risk factor for alcoholic hepatitis is the how much alcohol you drink. It isn't known how much alcohol it takes to cause alcoholic hepatitis.Most people with this condition have had at least seven drinks a day for 20 years or more. This can mean 7 glasses of wine, 7 beers, or 7 shots of spirits.However, alcoholic hepatitis can happen to people who drink less and have other risk factors, including:Esophageal varices are enlarged veins in the esophagus. They're often due to obstructed blood flow through the portal vein, which carries blood from the intestine to the liver.A healthy liver, at left, shows no signs of scarring. In cirrhosis, at right, scar tissue replaces healthy liver tissue.Complications of alcoholic hepatitis are caused by scar tissue on the liver. Scar tissue can slow blood flow through the liver. That can raise pressure in a major blood vessel called the portal vein and cause a buildup of toxins.Complications include:Enlarged veins, called varices. Blood that can't flow freely through the portal vein can back up into other blood vessels in the stomach and the tube through which food passes from the throat to the stomach, called the esophagus.These blood vessels have thin walls. They're likely to bleed if filled with too much blood. Heavy bleeding in the upper stomach or esophagus is life-threatening and needs medical care right away.You might reduce your risk of alcoholic hepatitis if you:Check before mixing medicines and alcohol. Ask your healthcare professional if it's safe to drink alcohol when taking your prescribed medicines. Read the warning labels on medicines you can get without a prescription.Don't drink alcohol when taking medicines that warn against drinking alcohol while taking them. This includes pain relievers such as acetaminophen (Tylenol, others).Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Transplants support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.1606 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 15 Replies Fri, Jun 21, 2024 100 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Other types of liver disease.Lack of nutrition.Sex.Obesity.Genes.Race and ethnicity.Binge drinking.Enlarged veins, called varices.Ascites (ah-SITE-ees).Confusion, drowsiness and slurred speech, called hepatic encephalopathy.Kidney failure.Cirrhosis.Drink alcohol in moderation, if at all.Protect yourself from hepatitis C.Check before mixing medicines and alcohol.Advertising & Sponsorship