Allergies occur when your immune system reacts to a foreign substance — such as pollen, bee venom or pet dander — or a food that doesn't cause a reaction in most people.Your immune system produces substances known as antibodies. When you have allergies, your immune system makes antibodies that identify a particular allergen as harmful, even though it isn't. When you come into contact with the allergen, your immune system's reaction can inflame your skin, sinuses, airways or digestive system.The severity of allergies varies from person to person and can range from minor irritation to anaphylaxis — a potentially life-threatening emergency. While most allergies can't be cured, treatments can help relieve your allergy symptoms.Allergy symptoms, which depend on the substance involved, can affect your airways, sinuses and nasal passages, skin, and digestive system. Allergic reactions can range from mild to severe. In some severe cases, allergies can trigger a life-threatening reaction known as anaphylaxis.Hay fever, also called allergic rhinitis, can cause:A food allergy can cause:An insect sting allergy can cause:A drug allergy can cause:Atopic dermatitis, an allergic skin condition also called eczema, can cause skin to:Some types of allergies, including allergies to foods and insect stings, can trigger a severe reaction known as anaphylaxis. A life-threatening medical emergency, anaphylaxis can cause you to go into shock. Signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis include:You might see your health care provider if you have symptoms you think are caused by an allergy, and nonprescription allergy medications don't provide enough relief. If you have symptoms after starting a new medication, call the provider who prescribed it right away.For a severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis), call 911 or your local emergency number or seek emergency medical help. If you carry an epinephrine auto-injector (Auvi-Q, EpiPen, others), give yourself a shot right away.Even if your symptoms improve after an epinephrine injection, you should go to the emergency department to make sure symptoms don't return when the effects of the injection wear off.If you've had a severe allergy attack or any signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis in the past, make an appointment to see your health care provider. Evaluation, diagnosis and long-term management of anaphylaxis are complicated, so you'll probably need to see a provider who specializes in allergies and immunology.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesAn allergy starts when your immune system mistakes a normally harmless substance for a dangerous invader. The immune system then produces antibodies that remain on the alert for that particular allergen. When you're exposed to the allergen again, these antibodies can release a number of immune system chemicals, such as histamine, that cause allergy symptoms.Common allergy triggers include:You might be more likely to develop an allergy if you:Having an allergy increases your risk of certain other medical problems, including:Preventing allergic reactions depends on the type of allergy you have. General measures include the following:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Hay fever,A food allergyAn insect sting allergyA drug allergyAtopic dermatitis,For a severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis),Airborne allergens,Certain foods,Insect stings,Medications,Latex or other substances you touch,Have a family history of asthma or allergies,Are a childHave asthmaAnaphylaxis.Asthma.Sinusitis and infections of the ears or lungs.Avoid known triggers.Keep a diary.Wear a medical alert bracelet.Advertising & Sponsorship