Amenorrhea (uh-men-o-REE-uh) is the absence of menstruation, often defined as missing one or more menstrual periods.Primary amenorrhea refers to the absence of menstruation in someone who has not had a period by age 15. The most common causes of primary amenorrhea relate to hormone levels, although anatomical problems also can cause amenorrhea.Secondary amenorrhea refers to the absence of three or more periods in a row by someone who has had periods in the past. Pregnancy is the most common cause of secondary amenorrhea, although problems with hormones also can cause secondary amenorrhea.Treatment of amenorrhea depends on the underlying cause.Depending on the cause of amenorrhea, you might experience other signs or symptoms along with the absence of periods, such as:Consult your doctor if you've missed at least three menstrual periods in a row, or if you've never had a menstrual period and you're age 15 or older.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Get the latest information from our Mayo Clinic experts on women’s health topics, serious and complex conditions, wellness and more. Click to view a preview and subscribe below.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix and vagina (vaginal canal) make up the female reproductive system.Amenorrhea can occur for a variety of reasons. Some are normal, while others may be a side effect of medication or a sign of a medical problem.During the normal course of your life, you may experience amenorrhea for natural reasons, such as:Some people who take birth control pills (oral contraceptives) may not have periods. Even after stopping birth control pills, it may take some time before regular ovulation and menstruation return. Contraceptives that are injected or implanted also may cause amenorrhea, as can some types of intrauterine devices.Certain medications can cause menstrual periods to stop, including some types of:Sometimes lifestyle factors contribute to amenorrhea, for instance:Many types of medical problems can cause hormonal imbalance, including:Problems with the sexual organs themselves also can cause amenorrhea. Examples include:Ovulation is the release of an egg from one of the ovaries. It often happens about midway through the menstrual cycle, although the exact timing may vary.In preparation for ovulation, the lining of the uterus, or endometrium, thickens. The pituitary gland in the brain stimulates one of the ovaries to release an egg. The wall of the ovarian follicle ruptures at the surface of the ovary. The egg is released.Finger-like structures called fimbriae sweep the egg into the neighboring fallopian tube. The egg travels through the fallopian tube, propelled in part by contractions in the fallopian tube walls. Here in the fallopian tube, the egg may be fertilized by a sperm.If the egg is fertilized, the egg and sperm unite to form a one-celled entity called a zygote. As the zygote travels down the fallopian tube toward the uterus, it begins dividing rapidly to form a cluster of cells called a blastocyst, which resembles a tiny raspberry. When the blastocyst reaches the uterus, it implants in the lining of the uterus and pregnancy begins.If the egg isn't fertilized, it's simply reabsorbed by the body — perhaps before it even reaches the uterus. About two weeks later, the lining of the uterus sheds through the vagina. This is known as menstruation.Factors that may increase your risk of amenorrhea include:The causes of amenorrhea can cause other problems as well. These include:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Low body weight.Excessive exercise.Stress.Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS).Thyroid malfunction.Pituitary tumor.Premature menopause.Uterine scarring.Lack of reproductive organs.Structural abnormality of the vagina.Family history.Eating disorders.Athletic training.History of certain gynecologic procedures.Infertility and problems with pregnancy.Psychological stress.Osteoporosis and cardiovascular disease.Pelvic pain.Advertising & Sponsorship