The ampulla of Vater is located where the bile duct and pancreatic duct join and empty into the small intestine.Ampullary cancer is cancer that starts as a growth of cells in the ampulla of Vater. The ampulla of Vater is located where the bile duct and pancreatic duct join and empty into the small intestine. Ampullary (AM-poo-la-ree) cancer is rare.Ampullary cancer forms near many other parts of the digestive system. This includes the liver, pancreas and small intestine. When ampullary cancer grows, it may affect these other organs.Ampullary cancer treatment often involves surgery to remove the cancer. Treatment also may include radiation therapy and chemotherapy to kill cancer cells.Signs and symptoms of ampullary cancer may include:Make an appointment with a doctor or other healthcare professional if you have any persistent symptoms that worry you.It's not clear what causes ampullary cancer.Ampullary cancer happens when cells in the ampulla of Vater develop changes in their DNA. A cell's DNA holds the instructions that tell a cell what to do. In healthy cells, the DNA gives instructions to grow and multiply at a set rate. The instructions tell the cells to die at a set time. In cancer cells, the changes give different instructions. The changes tell the cancer cells to make many more cells quickly. Cancer cells can keep living when healthy cells would die. This causes too many cells.The cancer cells might form a mass called a tumor. The tumor can grow to invade and destroy healthy body tissue. In time, cancer cells can break away and spread to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads, it's called metastatic cancer.Factors that can increase the risk of ampullary cancer include:There is no way to prevent ampullary cancer.Ampullary cancer care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Cancer support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.120 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 57 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 61 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Increasing age.DNA changes that run in families.Advertising & Sponsorship