Amyloidosis (am-uh-loi-DO-sis) is a rare disease that occurs when a protein called amyloid builds up in organs. This amyloid buildup can make the organs not work properly.Organs that may be affected include the heart, kidneys, liver, spleen, nervous system and digestive tract.Some types of amyloidosis occur with other diseases. These types may improve with treatment of the other diseases. Some types of amyloidosis may lead to life-threatening organ failure.Treatments may include chemotherapy with strong drugs used to treat cancer. Other types of medications can reduce amyloid production and control symptoms. Some people may benefit from organ or stem cell transplants.Some people with amyloidosis experience purpura — a condition in which small blood vessels leak blood into the skin. This most commonly occurs around the eyes but can also affect other parts of the body.An enlarged tongue (macroglossia) can be a sign of amyloidosis. It can sometimes also appear rippled along its edge.You may not experience symptoms of amyloidosis until later in the course of the disease. Symptoms may vary, depending on which organs are affected.Signs and symptoms of amyloidosis may include:See your health care provider if you regularly experience any of the signs or symptoms associated with amyloidosis.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThere are many different types of amyloidosis. Some types are hereditary. Others are caused by outside factors, such as inflammatory diseases or long-term dialysis. Many types affect multiple organs. Others affect only one part of the body.Types of amyloidosis include:Factors that increase the risk of amyloidosis include:Amyloidosis can seriously damage the:Amyloidosis care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Blood Cancers & Disorders support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.53 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 60 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 107 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.AL amyloidosis (immunoglobulin light chain amyloidosis).AA amyloidosis.Hereditary amyloidosis (familial amyloidosis).Wild-type amyloidosis.Localized amyloidosis.Age.Sex.Other diseases.Family history.Kidney dialysis.Race.Heart.Kidneys.Nervous system.Advertising & Sponsorship