An anal fissure is a small tear in the thin, moist tissue that lines the anus. The anus is the muscular opening at the end of the digestive tract where stool exits the body. Common causes of an anal fissure include constipation and straining or passing hard or large stools during a bowel movement. Anal fissures typically cause pain and bleeding with bowel movements. You also may experience spasms in the ring of muscle at the end of your anus, called the anal sphincter.Anal fissures are very common in young infants but can affect people of any age. Most anal fissures get better with simple treatments, such as increased fiber intake or soaking in a warm-water bath. Some people with anal fissures may need medicine or, occasionally, surgery.Symptoms of an anal fissure include:See your health care provider if you have pain during bowel movements or notice blood on stools or toilet paper after a bowel movement.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesCommon causes of anal fissures include:Less common causes of anal fissures include:Factors that may increase your risk of developing an anal fissure include:Complications of an anal fissure may include:You may be able to prevent an anal fissure by taking measures to prevent constipation or diarrhea. Eat high-fiber foods, drink fluids, and exercise regularly to keep from having to strain during bowel movements.Anal fissure care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Constipation.Childbirth.Crohn's disease.Anal intercourse.Age.Failure to heal.Recurrence.A tear that extends to surrounding muscles.Advertising & Sponsorship