The anal canal is a tube at the end of the rectum that measures 1 1/2 inches in length (about 4 centimeters). Muscles called sphincters surround the anal canal. The sphincters relax to allow waste to leave the body.Anal cancer is a growth of cells that starts in the anal canal. The anal canal is a short tube at the end of rectum. Stool passes through the anal canal as it leaves the body.Anal cancer can cause symptoms such as rectal bleeding, blood in the stool and anal pain. As it grows, it might cause a growth or lump. Sometimes these symptoms might be mistaken for hemorrhoids.In the past, most people with anal cancer had surgery to remove the cancer. Often this operation involved making a new way for waste to leave the body. Today, most anal cancer treatment involves chemotherapy and radiation therapy. With this approach, surgery might not be needed.Anal cancer signs and symptoms include:Make an appointment with a doctor or other healthcare professional if you have any symptoms that worry you.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesAnal cancer happens when cells in the anal canal develop changes in their DNA. A cell's DNA holds the instructions that tell a cell what to do. In healthy cells, the DNA gives instructions to grow and multiply at a set rate. The instructions tell the cells to die at a set time. In cancer cells, the changes give different instructions. The changes tell the cancer cells to make many more cells quickly. Cancer cells can keep living when healthy cells would die. This causes too many cells.The cancer cells might form a mass called a tumor. The tumor can grow to invade and destroy healthy body tissue. In time, cancer cells can break away and spread to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads, it's called metastatic cancer.Most anal cancers are thought to be caused by human papillomavirus, also called HPV. HPV is a common virus that's passed through sexual contact. For most people, the virus never causes problems. It usually goes away on its own. For some, though, the virus can cause changes in the cells that may lead to cancer.Things that may increase the risk of anal cancer include:Anal cancer rarely spreads to other parts of the body. Only a small percentage of cancers are found to have spread. Those that do are especially difficult to treat. Anal cancer that spreads most commonly goes to the liver and the lungs.There is no sure way to prevent anal cancer. To reduce your risk of anal cancer:Screening tests can help detect anal cancer and precancerous cells that may one day develop into anal cancer. Healthcare professionals sometimes recommend screening for people with a high risk of anal cancer.You might have a high risk of anal cancer if you:Screening tests might include:Medical groups don't agree on who should have anal cancer screening and what tests should be used. Screening can detect anal cancer when it's small and easier to treat. But studies haven't proved that anal cancer screening can save lives. Talk about the benefits and risks of screening with your healthcare team.Anal cancer care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Colorectal Cancer support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.57 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 87 Replies Mon, Jun 17, 2024 35 Replies Wed, Jun 12, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Being exposed to human papillomavirus, also called HPV.Increasing number of sexual partners.Having anal sex.Smoking cigarettes.Having a history of cancer.Having a weak immune system.Practice safer sex.Consider the HPV vaccine.Don't use tobacco.Anal Pap test.Anal HPV test.Digital rectal exam.Advertising & Sponsorship