Anemia is a problem of not having enough healthy red blood cells or hemoglobin to carry oxygen to the body's tissues. Hemoglobin is a protein found in red cells that carries oxygen from the lungs to all other organs in the body. Having anemia can cause tiredness, weakness and shortness of breath.There are many forms of anemia. Each has its own cause. Anemia can be short term or long term. It can range from mild to severe. Anemia can be a warning sign of serious illness.Treatments for anemia might involve taking supplements or having medical procedures. Eating a healthy diet might prevent some forms of anemia.Anemia symptoms depend on the cause and how bad the anemia is. Anemia can be so mild that it causes no symptoms at first. But symptoms usually then occur and get worse as the anemia gets worse.If another disease causes the anemia, the disease can mask the anemia symptoms. Then a test for another condition might find the anemia. Certain types of anemia have symptoms that point to the cause.Possible symptoms of anemia include:Make an appointment with your health care provider if you're tired or short of breath and don't know why.Low levels of the protein in red blood cells that carry oxygen, called hemoglobin, is the main sign of anemia. Some people learn they have low hemoglobin when they donate blood. If you're told that you can't donate because of low hemoglobin, make a medical appointment.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesAnemia occurs when the blood doesn't have enough hemoglobin or red blood cells.This can happen if: The body makes three types of blood cells. White blood cells fight infection, platelets help blood clot and red blood cells carry oxygen throughout the body.Red blood cells have an iron-rich protein that gives blood its red color, called hemoglobin. Hemoglobin lets red blood cells carry oxygen from the lungs to all parts of the body. And it lets red blood cells carry carbon dioxide from other parts of the body to the lungs to be breathed out.Spongy matter inside many of the large bones, called bone marrow, makes red blood cells and hemoglobin. To make them, the body needs iron, vitamin B-12, folate and other nutrients from foods.Different types of anemia have different causes. They include:Iron deficiency anemia. Too little iron in the body causes this most common type of anemia. Bone marrow needs iron to make hemoglobin. Without enough iron, the body can't make enough hemoglobin for red blood cells.Pregnant people can get this type of anemia if they don't take iron supplements. Blood loss also can cause it. Blood loss might be from heavy menstrual bleeding, an ulcer, cancer or regular use of some pain relievers, especially aspirin.Vitamin deficiency anemia. Besides iron, the body needs folate and vitamin B-12 to make enough healthy red blood cells. A diet that doesn't have enough of these and other key nutrients can result in the body not making enough red blood cells.Also, some people can't absorb vitamin B-12. This can lead to vitamin deficiency anemia, also called pernicious anemia.These factors can increase risk of anemia:Ongoing, called chronic, conditions. Having cancer, kidney failure, diabetes or another chronic condition increases the risk of anemia of chronic disease. These conditions can lead to having too few red blood cells.Slow, chronic blood loss from an ulcer or other source within the body can use up the body's store of iron, leading to iron deficiency anemia.If not treated, anemia can cause many health problems, such as:Many types of anemia can't be prevented. But eating a healthy diet might prevent iron deficiency anemia and vitamin deficiency anemias. A healthy diet includes:If you're concerned about getting enough vitamins and minerals from food, ask your health care provider about taking a multivitamin.Anemia care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Blood Cancers & Disorders support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.157 Replies Tue, Jun 25, 2024 61 Replies Tue, Jun 25, 2024 53 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Iron deficiency anemia.Vitamin deficiency anemia.Anemia of inflammation.Aplastic anemia.Anemias linked to bone marrow disease.Hemolytic anemias.Sickle cell anemia.A diet that doesn't have enough of certain vitamins and minerals.Problems with the small intestine.Menstrual periods.Pregnancy.Ongoing, called chronic, conditions.Family history.Other factors.Age.Severe tiredness.Pregnancy complications.Heart problems.Death.Iron.Folate.Vitamin B-12.Vitamin C.Advertising & Sponsorship