An aneurysm is an abnormal bulge or ballooning in the wall of a blood vessel. An aneurysm can burst. This is called a rupture. A ruptured aneurysm causes bleeding inside the body and often leads to death. Some aneurysms may not cause symptoms. You might not know you have an aneurysm even if it is large.Aneurysms can develop in several parts of the body, including:Some small aneurysms have a low risk of rupture. To determine the risk of an aneurysm rupture, a health care provider considers:Treatment of some aneurysms may only involve regular health checkups and imaging tests. If an aneurysm breaks open, emergency open surgery is needed. Sometimes a less-invasive treatment called endovascular surgery may be done.Vivien Williams: An aneurysm is an abnormal bulge or ballooning in the wall of a blood vessel.Bernard Bendok, M.D., Neurosurgery, Mayo Clinic: A portion of these patients will go on to have a rupture. And the challenge with rupture is that it's unpredictable.Vivien Williams: Dr. Bernard Bendok says a ruptured aneurysm is a medical emergency that can cause life-threatening bleeding in the brain.Dr. Bendok: The typical presentation is somebody who has the worst headache of their life.Vivien Williams: Fast treatment is essential. It includes open surgery or less-invasive options, such as sealing the ruptured artery from within the blood vessel with metal coils and/or stents.Dr. Bendok says 1 to 2 percent of the population have aneurysms and only a small percentage of that group will experience a rupture. People who have a family history of aneurysms, have polycystic kidney disease, connective tissue disease, and people who smoke are at increased risk of rupture and should consider screening. If a rupture happens, fast treatment can save lives.For the Mayo Clinic News Network, I'm Vivien Williams.Explore Mayo Clinic studies testing new treatments, interventions and tests as a means to prevent, detect, treat or manage this condition. Aneurysms care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Aortic Aneurysms support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.433 Replies Tue, Jun 11, 2024 501 Replies Mon, Jun 10, 2024 250 Replies Fri, May 24, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Vivien WilliamsBernard Bendok, M.D., Neurosurgery, Mayo ClinicVivien WilliamsDr. BendokVivien WilliamsAdvertising & Sponsorship