Angelman syndrome is a condition caused by a change in a gene, called a genetic change. Angelman syndrome causes delayed development, problems with speech and balance, mental disability, and, sometimes, seizures.Many people with Angelman syndrome smile and laugh often. They tend to be happy and easy to excite.Delays in maturing, called developmental delays, begin between about 6 and 12 months of age. The delays often are the first signs of Angelman syndrome. Seizures may begin between the ages of 2 and 3 years old.People with Angelman syndrome tend to live close to a typical life span. But the condition can't be cured. Treatment focuses on managing medical, sleep and developmental issues.Angelman syndrome symptoms include:People who have Angelman syndrome also may have:Most babies with Angelman syndrome don't show symptoms at birth. The first signs of Angelman syndrome most often are developmental delays. This includes lack of crawling or babbling between 6 and 12 months.If your child seems to have developmental delays or if your child has other symptoms of Angelman syndrome, make an appointment with your child's healthcare professional.Angelman syndrome is caused by changes in a gene, called a genetic change. It's most often caused by changes in a gene on chromosome 15 called the ubiquitin protein ligase E3A (UBE3A) gene. You receive your pairs of genes from your parents. One copy comes from your mother, called the maternal copy. The other comes from your father, called the paternal copy.Your cells most often use information from both copies. But in a small number of genes, such as the UBE3A gene, only the copy from the mother is active.Most often, the maternal copy of the UBE3A gene helps the brain develop. Angelman syndrome happens when part of the maternal copy is missing or damaged. So the brain can't get the information it needs to develop and control speech and movement.Rarely, Angelman syndrome is caused when two paternal copies of the gene are passed down instead of one from each parent.Angelman syndrome is rare. Researchers often don't know what causes the genetic changes that result in the disease. Most people with Angelman syndrome don't have a family history.But sometimes Angelman syndrome may be passed down from a parent. A family history of the disease may increase a baby's risk of getting Angelman syndrome.Complications linked to Angelman syndrome include:Rarely, Angelman syndrome may be passed from an affected parent to a child through changed genes. If you're concerned about a family history of Angelman syndrome or if you have a child with the condition, seek medical advice. Your healthcare professional or a genetic counselor can help you plan future pregnancies.Angelman syndrome care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Trouble feeding.Hyperactivity.Sleep troubles.Curving of the spine, also called scoliosis.Obesity.Advertising & Sponsorship