Angina (an-JIE-nuh or AN-juh-nuh) is a type of chest pain caused by reduced blood flow to the heart. Angina is a symptom of coronary artery disease.Angina also is called angina pectoris.Angina is often described as squeezing, pressure, heaviness, tightness or pain in the chest. It may feel like a heavy weight lying on the chest. Angina may be a new pain that needs to be checked by a healthcare professional, or it may be recurring pain that goes away with treatment.Angina is relatively common. But some people may not be able to tell it apart from other types of chest pain, such as heartburn. If you have unexplained chest pain, get medical help right away.There are different types of angina. The type depends on the cause and whether rest or medicine eases symptoms.Stable angina. Stable angina is the most common form of angina. It usually happens during activity, also called exertion. It goes away with rest or angina medicine. Pain that starts when you're walking uphill or in the cold weather may be angina.Stable angina is predictable. It is usually similar to previous episodes of chest pain. The chest pain typically lasts a short time, perhaps five minutes or less.A heart attack occurs when an artery supplying the heart with blood and oxygen becomes blocked. Fatty deposits build up over time, forming plaques in the heart's arteries. If a plaque ruptures, a blood clot can form and block the arteries, causing a heart attack. During a heart attack, tissue in the heart muscle dies due to lack of blood flow through the heart's arteries.Angina symptoms include chest pain and discomfort. The chest pain or discomfort may feel like:Pain also may be felt in the arms, neck, jaw, shoulder or back.Other symptoms of angina include:The severity, duration and type of angina can vary. New or different symptoms may signal unstable angina or a heart attack.Any new or worsening angina symptoms need to be checked immediately by a healthcare professional. The healthcare team can determine whether you have stable or unstable angina.Symptoms of angina in women can be different from the classic angina symptoms. These differences may lead to delays in seeking treatment. For example, chest pain may not be the only symptom or the most common symptom. Other symptoms of angina in women may include:Chest pain that lasts longer than a few minutes and doesn't go away with rest or angina medicines may be due to a heart attack. Call 911 or emergency medical help. Only drive yourself to the hospital if there is no other way to get there.If chest discomfort is a new symptom for you, see a healthcare professional to determine the cause and to get proper treatment. If you have stable angina and it gets worse or changes, seek medical help immediately.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesAngina is caused by reduced blood flow to the heart muscle. Blood carries oxygen, which the heart muscle needs to survive. When the heart muscle isn't getting enough oxygen, it causes a condition called ischemia.The most common cause of reduced blood flow to the heart muscle is coronary artery disease (CAD). The heart arteries, called the coronary arteries, can become narrowed by fatty deposits called plaques. This condition is called atherosclerosis.Plaque in a blood vessel may rupture or cause a blood clot. These events can quickly block or reduce flow through a narrowed artery. This can suddenly and severely decrease blood flow to the heart muscle.The heart muscle may still be able to work during times of low oxygen demand without triggering angina symptoms. An example is when resting. But when the demand for oxygen goes up, such as when exercising, angina can result.The following things may increase the risk of angina:The chest pain that occurs with angina can make doing some activities, such as walking, uncomfortable. However, the most dangerous complication is a heart attack.If you have any of these symptoms, seek emergency medical attention immediately.You can help prevent angina by following the same lifestyle changes that are used to treat angina:Also get recommended vaccines to avoid heart complications.Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart & Blood Health support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.346 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 58 Replies Thu, Jun 20, 2024 106 Replies Wed, Jun 19, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Stable angina.Unstable angina, which is a medical emergency.Variant angina, also called Prinzmetal angina.Refractory angina.Increasing age.Family history of heart disease.Tobacco use.Diabetes.High blood pressure.High cholesterol or triglycerides.Other health conditions.Not enough exercise.Obesity.Emotional stress.Medicines.Drug misuse.Cold temperatures.Advertising & Sponsorship