A dropped or prolapsed bladder (cystocele) occurs when the bladder bulges into the vaginal space. It results when the muscles and tissues that support the bladder give way.Anterior vaginal prolapse, also known as a cystocele (SIS-toe-seel) or a prolapsed bladder, is when the bladder drops from its usual position in the pelvis and pushes on the wall of the vagina.The organs of the pelvis — including the bladder, uterus and intestines — are typically held in place by the muscles and connective tissues of the pelvic floor. Anterior prolapse occurs when the pelvic floor becomes weak or if too much pressure is put on the pelvic floor. This can happen over time, during vaginal childbirth or with chronic constipation, violent coughing or heavy lifting.Anterior prolapse is treatable. For a mild or moderate prolapse, nonsurgical treatment is often effective. In more severe cases, surgery may be necessary to keep the vagina and other pelvic organs in their proper positions.In mild cases of anterior prolapse, you may not notice any signs or symptoms. When signs and symptoms occur, they may include:Signs and symptoms often are especially noticeable after standing for long periods of time and may go away when you lie down.A prolapsed bladder can be uncomfortable, but it is rarely painful. It can make emptying your bladder difficult, which may lead to bladder infections. Make an appointment with your health care provider if you have any signs or symptoms that bother you or impact your daily activities.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Get the latest information from our Mayo Clinic experts on women’s health topics, serious and complex conditions, wellness and more. Click to view a preview and subscribe below.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesYour pelvic floor consists of muscles, ligaments and connective tissues that support your bladder and other pelvic organs. The connections between your pelvic organs and ligaments can weaken over time, or as a result of trauma from childbirth or chronic straining. When this happens, your bladder can slip down lower than usual and bulge into your vagina (anterior prolapse).Causes of stress to the pelvic floor include:These factors may increase your risk of anterior prolapse:Anterior vaginal prolapse (cystocele) care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Pregnancy and childbirth.Aging.Hysterectomy.Genetics.Obesity.Advertising & Sponsorship