Antiphospholipid (AN-te-fos-fo-LIP-id) syndrome is a condition in which the immune system mistakenly creates antibodies that attack tissues in the body. These antibodies can cause blood clots to form in arteries and veins.Blood clots can form in the legs, lungs and other organs, such as the kidneys and spleen. The clots can lead to a heart attack, strokes and other conditions. During pregnancy, antiphospholipid syndrome also can result in miscarriage and stillbirth. Some people who have the syndrome have no signs or symptoms.There's no cure for this uncommon condition, but medications can reduce the risk of blood clots and miscarriage.Signs and symptoms of antiphospholipid syndrome can include:Less common signs and symptoms include:Contact your health care provider if you have unexplained bleeding from your nose or gums; an unusually heavy menstrual period; vomit that is bright red or looks like coffee grounds; black, tarry stool or bright red stool; or unexplained abdominal pain.Seek emergency care if you have signs and symptoms of:Antiphospholipid syndrome occurs when the immune system mistakenly produces antibodies that make blood much more likely to clot. Antibodies usually protect the body against invaders, such as viruses and bacteria.Antiphospholipid syndrome can be caused by an underlying condition, such as an autoimmune disorder. You can also develop the syndrome without an underlying cause.Antiphospholipid syndrome is more common in women than in men. Having another autoimmune condition, such as lupus, increases the risk of antiphospholipid syndrome.It's possible to have the antibodies associated with antiphospholipid syndrome without developing signs or symptoms. However, having these antibodies increases your risk of developing blood clots, particularly if you:Complications of antiphospholipid syndrome can include:Rarely, in severe cases, antiphospholipid syndrome can lead to multiple organ damage in a short time.Feb 25, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.