In aortic valve regurgitation, the aortic valve doesn't close properly. This causes blood to flow backward from the body's main artery, called the aorta, into the lower left heart chamber, called the left ventricle.Aortic valve regurgitation — also called aortic regurgitation — is a type of heart valve disease. The valve between the lower left heart chamber and the body's main artery doesn't close tightly. As a result, some of the blood pumped out of the heart's main pumping chamber, called the left ventricle, leaks backward.The leakage may prevent the heart from doing a good enough job of pumping blood to the rest of the body. You may feel tired and short of breath.Aortic valve regurgitation can develop suddenly or over many years. Once the condition becomes severe, surgery often is needed to repair or replace the valve.Most often, aortic valve regurgitation develops over time. You may have no symptoms for years. You might not realize that you have the condition. But sometimes, aortic valve regurgitation occurs suddenly. Usually, this is due to an infection of the valve.As aortic valve regurgitation becomes worse, symptoms may include:Call a member of your health care team right away if you have symptoms of aortic valve regurgitation.Sometimes the first symptoms of aortic valve regurgitation are related to heart failure. Heart failure is a condition in which the heart can't pump blood as well as it should. Make an appointment with your health care team if you have:These are common symptoms of heart failure.A typical heart has two upper and two lower chambers. The upper chambers, the right and left atria, receive incoming blood. The lower chambers, the more muscular right and left ventricles, pump blood out of the heart. The heart valves are gates at the chamber openings. They keep blood flowing in the right direction.The aortic valve is one of four valves that control blood flow through the heart. It separates the heart's main pumping chamber, called the left ventricle, and the body's main artery, called the aorta. The aortic valve has flaps, also called cusps or leaflets, that open and close once during each heartbeat.In aortic valve regurgitation, the valve doesn't close properly. This causes blood to leak back into the lower left heart chamber, called the left ventricle. As a result, the chamber holds more blood. This could cause it to get larger and thicken.At first, the larger left ventricle helps maintain good blood flow with more force. But eventually, the heart becomes weak.Any condition that damages the aortic valve can cause aortic valve regurgitation. Causes may include:Heart valve disease present at birth. Some people are born with an aortic valve that has only two cusps, called a bicuspid valve. Others are born with connected cusps rather than the typical three separate ones. Sometimes the valve may have only one cusp, called a unicuspid valve. Other times, there are four cusps, called a quadricuspid valve.Having a parent or sibling with a bicuspid valve raises your risk of the condition. But you can have a bicuspid valve even if you don't have a family history of the condition.Things that raise the risk of aortic valve regurgitation include:The condition also can happen without any known risk factors.Complications of aortic valve regurgitation can include:If you have any type of heart disease, get regular health checkups.If you have a parent, child or sibling with a bicuspid aortic valve, you should have an imaging test called an echocardiogram. This can check for aortic valve regurgitation. Early diagnosis of heart valve disease, such as aortic valve regurgitation, is important. Doing so may make the condition easier to treat.Also, take steps to prevent conditions that can raise the risk of aortic valve regurgitation. For example:Aortic valve regurgitation care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart & Blood Health support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.346 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 58 Replies Thu, Jun 20, 2024 106 Replies Wed, Jun 19, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Heart valve disease present at birth.Narrowing of the aortic valve, called aortic stenosis.Inflammation of the inner lining of the heart's chambers and valves.Rheumatic fever.Other health conditions.Tear or injury of the body's main artery.Get a health checkup if you have a severe sore throat.Check your blood pressure regularly.Advertising & Sponsorship