An aortic dissection is a serious condition in which a tear occurs in the inner layer of the body's main artery (aorta). Blood rushes through the tear, causing the inner and middle layers of the aorta to split (dissect). If the blood goes through the outside aortic wall, aortic dissection is often deadly. A thoracic aortic aneurysm occurs when a weak spot in the wall of the aorta begins to bulge, as shown on the left image. Having an aneurysm increases the risk of rupture or a tear in the aorta's lining (dissection), as shown in the image on the right. Aortic dissection is relatively uncommon. It usually occurs in men in their 60s and 70s. Symptoms of aortic dissection may mimic those of other diseases, often leading to delays in diagnosis. However, when an aortic dissection is detected early and treated promptly, the chance of survival greatly improves.Aortic dissection symptoms may be similar to those of other heart problems, such as a heart attack. Typical signs and symptoms include:If you have severe chest pain, fainting, sudden shortness of breath or symptoms of a stroke, call 911 or your local emergency number. These signs and symptoms aren't always due to a serious problem, but it's best to be seen by a doctor quickly. Early detection and treatment may help save your life.An aortic dissection is caused by a weakened area of the aorta's wall.Aortic dissections are divided into two groups, depending on which part of the aorta is affected:Some of the things that may raise your risk of aortic dissection include:Certain genetic diseases increase the risk of having an aortic dissection, including:Inflammation of the arteries (giant cell arteritis) may also increase your risk of aortic dissection.Other potential risk factors for aortic dissection include:Possible complications of aortic dissection include:You can reduce your risk of an aortic dissection by preventing chest injury and taking steps to keep your heart healthy.Work with your doctor. If you have a family history of aortic dissection, a connective tissue disorder or a bicuspid aortic valve, tell your doctor. If you have an aortic aneurysm, find out how often you need monitoring and if surgery is necessary to repair your aneurysm.If you have a genetic condition that increases your risk of aortic dissection, your doctor may recommend medications, even if your blood pressure is normal.Aug 06, 2021CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.