Aortic valve stenosis is a thickening and narrowing of the valve between the heart's main pumping chamber and the body's main artery, called the aorta. The narrowing creates a smaller opening for blood to pass through. This reduces or blocks blood flow from the heart to the rest of the body. Typically the aortic valve has three cusps, called a tricuspid aortic valve. But some people are born with an aortic valve that has two cusps, a condition called bicuspid aortic valve.In aortic valve regurgitation, the aortic valve doesn't close properly. This causes blood to flow backward from the body's main artery, called the aorta, into the lower left heart chamber, called the left ventricle.Aortic valve disease is a type of heart valve disease. In this condition, the valve between the lower left heart chamber and the body's main artery doesn't work properly.The aortic valve helps keep blood flowing in the correct direction through the heart. A damaged or diseased aortic valve can affect blood flow to the rest of the heart and body.Aortic valve disease includes:A person may be born with aortic valve disease. This is called a congenital heart defect. Sometimes aortic valve disease occurs later in life due to other health conditions.Treatment for aortic valve disease depends on the type and severity of disease. Some people may need surgery to repair or replace the aortic valve.Some people with aortic valve disease may not notice symptoms for many years. Symptoms of aortic valve disease may include:If you're having sudden chest pain, call 911 or your local emergency number.Make an appointment for a health checkup if you have symptoms of aortic valve disease, such as shortness of breath, fatigue after activity, or sensations of a pounding or an irregular heartbeat. Sometimes the first symptoms of aortic valve disease are related to heart failure. Get a health checkup if you have fatigue that doesn't get better with rest, shortness of breath, and swollen ankles and feet, which are common symptoms of heart failure.A typical heart has two upper and two lower chambers. The upper chambers, the right and left atria, receive incoming blood. The lower chambers, the more muscular right and left ventricles, pump blood out of the heart. The heart valves help keep blood flowing in the right direction.Aortic valve disease may be caused by a heart problem present at birth, called a congenital heart defect. Other causes of aortic valve disease later in life include:To better understand the causes of aortic valve disease, it may be helpful to know how the heart valves typically work.The heart has four valves that keep blood flowing in the correct direction. These valves are:In aortic valve stenosis, the aortic valve opening is narrowed, as seen in the top image. The heart must work harder to pump blood across the smaller opening. This increases pressure within the heart. Eventually the strain reduces the heart's ability to pump blood to the body. This is like placing smaller and smaller nozzles on the end of a garden hose, as shown on the bottom image. The narrower the nozzle is, the slower the flow of water. This results in pressure buildup within the garden hose.Each valve has flaps, also called cusps or leaflets, that open and close once during each heartbeat.In aortic valve disease, the valve between the lower left heart chamber and the body's main artery doesn't work properly. The lower left heart chamber is called the left ventricle. The body's main artery is called the aorta.The valve may become thick and stiff or the valve may not close properly.Many things can raise the risk of aortic valve disease, including:Potential complications of aortic valve disease may include:Proper diagnosis and treatment can help reduce the risk of complications.Aortic valve disease care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart & Blood Health support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.346 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 58 Replies Thu, Jun 20, 2024 106 Replies Wed, Jun 19, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Aortic valve stenosis.Aortic valve regurgitation.Older age.Heart valve problems present at birth, called congenital heart defects.Rheumatic fever.Inflammation of the lining of the heart's chambers and valves, called endocarditis.History of radiation therapy to the chest.Other health conditions.Advertising & Sponsorship