The appendix is a narrow, finger-shaped pouch that projects out from the colon. Appendicitis occurs when the appendix becomes inflamed and filled with pus.Appendicitis is an inflammation of the appendix. The appendix is a finger-shaped pouch that sticks out from the colon on the lower right side of the belly, also called the abdomen.Appendicitis causes pain in the lower right abdomen. However, in most people, pain begins around the belly button and then moves. As inflammation worsens, appendicitis pain typically increases and eventually becomes serious.Although anyone can develop appendicitis, most often it occurs in people between the ages of 10 and 30. Treatment of appendicitis is usually antibiotics and surgery to remove the appendix.Symptoms of appendicitis may include:The site of the pain may vary, depending on age and the position of the appendix. In pregnancy, the pain may seem to come from the upper abdomen because the appendix is higher during pregnancy.Make an appointment with your health care team if you or your child has symptoms. Terrible abdominal pain requires immediate medical attention.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesA blockage in the lining of the appendix is the likely cause of appendicitis. This blockage can cause an infection. The bacteria then multiply quickly, causing the appendix to become inflamed, swollen and filled with pus. If not treated right away, the appendix can break open.Appendicitis can cause serious complications, such as:A pocket of pus that forms in the abdomen. If your appendix bursts, you may develop a pocket of infection, called an abscess. In most cases, a surgeon drains the abscess by placing a tube through your abdominal wall into the abscess. The tube is left in place for about two weeks, and you're given antibiotics to clear the infection.Once the infection is clear, you'll have surgery to remove the appendix. In some people, the abscess is drained, and the appendix is removed immediately.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.A burst appendix.A pocket of pus that forms in the abdomen.Advertising & Sponsorship