An arteriovenous (AV) fistula is an irregular connection between an artery and a vein. Usually, blood flows from the arteries to tiny blood vessels (capillaries), and then on to the veins. Nutrients and oxygen in the blood travel from the capillaries to tissues in the body.With an arteriovenous fistula, blood flows directly from an artery into a vein, avoiding some capillaries. When this happens, tissues below the avoided capillaries receive less blood. An arteriovenous (AV) fistula is an irregular connection between an artery and a vein. Blood flow avoids tiny blood vessels (capillaries) and moves directly from an artery into a vein. Arteriovenous fistulas usually occur in the legs but can develop anywhere in the body. An arteriovenous fistula may be surgically created for use in dialysis in people with severe kidney disease.Symptoms of arteriovenous fistulas depend on where they form in the body. A large untreated arteriovenous fistula can lead to serious complications. Treatment for arteriovenous fistulas includes monitoring, compression, catheter-based procedures and, sometimes, surgery.Small arteriovenous fistulas in the legs, arms, lungs, kidneys or brain often won't have any signs or symptoms. Small arteriovenous fistulas usually don't need treatment other than monitoring by a health care provider. Large arteriovenous fistulas may cause signs and symptoms.Arteriovenous fistula signs and symptoms may include:A significant arteriovenous fistula in the lungs (pulmonary arteriovenous fistula) is a serious condition and can cause:An arteriovenous fistula in the digestive tract can cause gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding.If you have signs and symptoms of an arteriovenous fistula, make an appointment to see your health care provider. Early detection of an arteriovenous fistula may make the condition easier to treat. It may also reduce the risk of developing complications, including blood clots or heart failure.Arteriovenous fistulas may be present at birth (congenital) or they may occur later in life (acquired). Causes of arteriovenous fistulas include:Certain genetic or congenital conditions increase the risk of arteriovenous fistulas. Other potential risk factors for arteriovenous fistulas include:Left untreated, an arteriovenous fistula can cause complications. Some complications may be serious. These include:May 17, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.