Ascariasis (as-kuh-RIE-uh-sis) is a type of roundworm infection. These worms are parasites that use your body as a host to mature from larvae or eggs to adult worms. Adult worms, which reproduce, can be more than a foot (30 centimeters) long. Ascariasis worms are typically pink or white with tapered ends. Female worms can be more than 15 inches (40 centimeters) long and a little less than a quarter inch (6 millimeters) in diameter. Male worms are generally smaller. One of the most common worm infections in people worldwide, ascariasis is uncommon in the United States. Most infected people have mild cases with no symptoms. But heavy infestation can lead to serious symptoms and complications.Ascariasis occurs most often in children in tropical and subtropical regions of the world — especially in areas with poor sanitation and hygiene.Most people infected with ascariasis have no signs or symptoms. Moderate to heavy infestations cause various signs or symptoms, depending on which part of your body is affected.After you swallow the tiny (microscopic) ascariasis eggs, they hatch in the small intestine and the larvae migrate through the bloodstream or lymphatic system into the lungs. At this stage, you may experience signs and symptoms similar to asthma or pneumonia, including:After spending 10 to 14 days in the lungs, the larvae travel to the throat, where you cough them up and then swallow them.The larvae mature into adult worms in the small intestine, and the adult worms typically live in the intestines until they die. In mild or moderate ascariasis, the intestinal infestation can cause:If you have a large number of worms in the intestine, you might have:Talk to your doctor if you have persistent abdominal pain, diarrhea or nausea.Ascariasis isn't spread directly from person to person. Instead, a person has to come into contact with soil mixed with human or pig feces that contain ascariasis eggs or infected water. In some developing countries, human feces are used for fertilizer, or poor sanitary facilities allow human waste to mix with soil in yards, ditches and fields. People can also get it from eating uncooked pig or chicken liver that is infected.Small children often play in dirt, and infection can occur if they put their dirty fingers in their mouths. Unwashed fruits or vegetables grown in contaminated soil also can transmit the ascariasis eggs.The whole process — from egg ingestion to egg deposits — takes about two or three months. Ascariasis worms can live inside your body for a year or two.Risk factors for ascariasis include:Mild cases of ascariasis usually don't cause complications. If you have a heavy infestation, potentially dangerous complications may include:The best defense against ascariasis is good hygiene and common sense. Follow these tips to avoid infection:May 17, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.