Lasting ataxia usually results from damage to the part of the brain that controls muscle coordination, known as the cerebellum.Ataxia describes poor muscle control that causes clumsy movements. It can affect walking and balance, hand coordination, speech and swallowing, and eye movements.Ataxia usually results from damage to the part of the brain called the cerebellum or its connections. The cerebellum controls muscle coordination. Many conditions can cause ataxia, including genetic conditions, stroke, tumors, multiple sclerosis, degenerative diseases and alcohol misuse. Certain medicines also can cause ataxia.Treatment for ataxia depends on the cause. Devices such as walkers and canes might help maintain independence. These also are called adaptive devices. Physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech therapy and regular exercise also might help.Ataxia symptoms can develop over time or start suddenly. Ataxia can be a symptom of several nervous system conditions. Symptoms may include:If you don't already have a condition that causes ataxia, such as multiple sclerosis, see your healthcare professional as soon as possible if you:Ataxia is caused by damage to the part of the brain called the cerebellum or its connections. The cerebellum is located at the base of the brain and connects to the brainstem. The cerebellum helps control balance, eye movements, swallowing and speech.There are three major groups of ataxia causes: acquired, degenerative and hereditary.Some types of ataxia and some conditions that cause ataxia are passed down in families. These conditions also are called hereditary. If you have one of these conditions, you may have been born with a genetic change that causes the body to make irregular proteins.The irregular proteins affect the function of nerve cells, primarily in the cerebellum and spinal cord. They cause the nerve cells to break down and die, known as degeneration. As the disease progresses, coordination problems worsen.People with a genetic ataxia may have inherited a dominant gene from one parent, known as an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. Or they may have inherited a recessive gene from both parents, known as an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern. In a recessive condition, the parents are not affected but siblings may be affected.Different gene changes cause different types of ataxia. Most types get worse over time. Each type causes poor coordination but also has other specific symptoms.In an autosomal dominant disorder, the changed gene is a dominant gene. It's located on one of the nonsex chromosomes, called autosomes. Only one changed gene is needed for someone to be affected by this type of condition. A person with an autosomal dominant condition — in this example, the father — has a 50% chance of having an affected child with one changed gene and a 50% chance of having an unaffected child.Episodic ataxia (EA). There are eight recognized types of episodic ataxia. The types EA1 and EA2 are the most common. EA1 involves brief bouts of ataxia that may last seconds or minutes. The bouts are triggered by stress, sudden movement or being startled. They're often associated with muscle twitching.EA2 involves longer bouts of ataxia, usually lasting from 30 minutes to six hours. These bouts also are triggered by stress. Dizziness and muscle weakness may occur. People with EA2 may feel very tired. Sometimes symptoms resolve later in life. Episodic ataxia doesn't shorten life span, and symptoms may respond to medicine.To have an autosomal recessive disorder, you inherit two changed genes, sometimes called mutations. You get one from each parent. Their health is rarely affected because they have only one changed gene. Two carriers have a 25% chance of having an unaffected child with two unaffected genes. They have a 50% chance of having an unaffected child who also is a carrier. They have a 25% chance of having an affected child with two changed genes.Friedreich ataxia. This is the most common hereditary ataxia. It involves damage to the cerebellum, spinal cord and peripheral nerves. Peripheral nerves carry signals from the arms and legs to the brain and spinal cord. Symptoms typically appear well before age 25. A brain scan usually doesn't show changes to the cerebellum with this type of ataxia.The first symptom of Friedreich ataxia often is trouble walking. The condition typically goes on to affect the arms and trunk. This type of ataxia can cause changes to the feet, such as high arches. It also can cause a curve of the spine, known as scoliosis.Other symptoms that might develop include slurred speech, fatigue, irregular eye movements and hearing loss. Friedreich ataxia also may lead to heart enlargement, known as cardiomyopathy. Heart failure and diabetes also can occur. Early treatment of heart conditions can improve quality of life and survival.Ataxia-telangiectasia. This rare childhood disease causes degeneration in the brain and immune system. This increases the risk of other diseases, including infections and tumors.Telangiectasia is the formation of tiny red "spider" veins that might appear in the corners of a child's eyes or on the ears and cheeks. Delayed motor skill development, poor balance and slurred speech are often the first symptoms. Frequent sinus and respiratory infections are common.Children with ataxia-telangiectasia are at high risk of developing cancer, particularly leukemia or lymphoma.There are several risk factors for ataxia. People who have a family history of ataxia are at a higher risk of having ataxia themselves.Other risk factors include:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Alcohol.Medicines.Toxins.Too little or too much of certain vitamins.Thyroid conditions.Stroke.Multiple sclerosis.Autoimmune diseases.Infections.COVID-19.Paraneoplastic syndromes.Changes in the brain.Head trauma.Cerebral palsy.Multiple system atrophy.Spinocerebellar ataxias.Episodic ataxia (EA).Friedreich ataxia.RFC1-associated ataxia.Ataxia-telangiectasia.Congenital cerebellar ataxia.Wilson's disease.Advertising & Sponsorship