Atelectasis (at-uh-LEK-tuh-sis) is the collapse of a lung or part of a lung, also known as a lobe. It happens when tiny air sacs within the lung, called alveoli, lose air.Atelectasis is one of the most common breathing complications after surgery. It's also a possible complication of other respiratory problems, including cystic fibrosis, lung tumors, chest injuries, fluid in the lung and respiratory weakness. You may develop atelectasis if you breathe in a foreign object.This condition can make breathing hard, particularly if you already have lung disease. Treatment depends on what's causing the collapse and how severe it is.The definition of atelectasis is broader than pneumothorax (noo-moe-THOR-aks). Pneumothorax is when air leaks into the space between your lungs and chest wall, causing part or all of a lung to collapse. Pneumothorax is one of several causes of atelectasis.There may be no clear signs of atelectasis. If you have any signs, they may include:Always get medical attention right away if you have a hard time breathing. Other conditions besides atelectasis can make it hard to breathe, so it's important to get the right diagnosis and treatment. If your breathing suddenly becomes difficult, get emergency medical help.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesA blocked airway can cause atelectasis. This is called obstructive atelectasis. Pressure from outside the lung also can cause atelectasis. This is called nonobstructive atelectasis.General anesthesia — which brings on a sleeplike state with the use of medicines before a procedure or surgery — is a common cause of atelectasis. It changes your regular pattern of breathing and affects the exchange of lung gases. This can cause the air sacs in your lungs to lose air. Nearly everyone who has major surgery has some amount of atelectasis. It often occurs after heart bypass surgery.When a blocked airway causes atelectasis, it may be due to:Possible causes of atelectasis due to pressure from outside the lung include:Factors that make you more likely to get atelectasis include:A small area of atelectasis, especially in adults, usually can be treated. These complications may come from atelectasis:Atelectasis in children is often caused by a blockage in the airway. To lower the risk of atelectasis, keep small objects out of the reach of children.In adults, atelectasis most commonly occurs after major surgery. If you're scheduled for surgery, talk with your doctor about ways to lower your risk. Some research shows that certain breathing exercises and muscle training may lower the risk of atelectasis after some surgeries.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Mucus plug.Foreign body.Tumor inside the airway.Injury.Pleural effusion.Pneumonia.Pneumothorax.Scarring of lung tissue.Tumor.Low blood oxygen (hypoxemia).Pneumonia.Respiratory failure.Advertising & Sponsorship