Athlete's foot (tinea pedis) is a fungal skin infection that usually begins between the toes. It commonly occurs in people whose feet have become very sweaty while confined within tight-fitting shoes.Signs and symptoms of athlete's foot include an itchy, scaly rash. The condition is contagious and can be spread via contaminated floors, towels or clothing.Athlete's foot is closely related to other fungal infections such as ringworm and jock itch. It can be treated with antifungal medications, but the infection often comes back.Illustration of athlete’s foot on different skin colors. The fungal infection causes scaly rash that may itch, sting or burn.Athlete's foot can affect one or both feet. Common signs and symptoms are:Athlete's foot can cause dry, scaly skin on the bottom and sides of the foot.If you have a rash on your foot that doesn't improve within two weeks of beginning self-treatment with an over-the-counter antifungal product, see your doctor.If you have diabetes, see your doctor if you suspect that you have athlete's foot. Also see your doctor if you have signs of an infection — swelling of the affected area, pus, fever.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesAthlete's foot is caused by the same type of fungi (dermatophytes) that cause ringworm and jock itch. Damp socks and shoes and warm, humid conditions favor the organisms' growth.Athlete's foot is contagious and can spread through contact with an infected person or from contact with contaminated surfaces, such as towels, floors and shoes. You can also spread it from the foot to other parts of the body, especially if you scratch or pick the infected parts of your foot.You are at higher risk of athlete's foot if you:The athlete's foot infection can spread to other warm, moist parts of the body. Jock itch is often caused by the same fungus that results in athlete's foot. It's common for the infection to spread from the feet to the groin because the fungus can travel on hands or towels.Athlete's foot can sometimes lead to bacterial infections.These tips can help you avoid athlete's foot or avoid spreading it to others:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Let your feet air out.Wash your feet daily.Change socks regularly.Alternate pairs of shoes.Protect your feet in public places.Be aware of the risk factors for spreading the condition.Advertising & Sponsorship