Atopic dermatitis can cause a very itchy rash. Atopic dermatitis most often occurs where the skin flexes — inside the elbows, behind the knees and in front of the neck.Atopic dermatitis (eczema) is a condition that causes dry, itchy and inflamed skin. It's common in young children but can occur at any age. Atopic dermatitis is long lasting (chronic) and tends to flare sometimes. It can be irritating but it's not contagious.People with atopic dermatitis are at risk of developing food allergies, hay fever and asthma.Moisturizing regularly and following other skin care habits can relieve itching and prevent new outbreaks (flares). Treatment may also include medicated ointments or creams.Inflammation caused by atopic dermatitis can cover large areas of the body, such as the chest, or be limited to a few small spots.Atopic dermatitis in infants (infantile eczema) appears here as red, itchy patches on very dry skin.Atopic dermatitis (eczema) symptoms can appear anywhere on the body and vary widely from person to person. They may include:Atopic dermatitis often begins before age 5 and may continue into the teen and adult years. For some people, it flares and then clears up for a time, even for several years.Talk with a health care provider if you or your child:Seek immediate medical attention if you or your child has a fever and the rash looks infected.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesJason T. Howland: Atopic dermatitis is a sensitivity disease of the skin, similar to asthma in the lungs, hay fever in the sinuses and food allergies in the gut.Dawn Marie R. Davis, M.D.: It's a multisystem disorder. Inflammation affects the skin, and the skin is more sensitive than usual.Howland: It's a chronic condition and tends to flare periodically. The symptoms vary.Dr. Davis: Atopic dermatitis tends to be red, weepy, crusty, itchy, flaky patches, like oval or circular-shaped areas on the skin.Our skin is like a brick wall. And over time as we age, or genetically if we are predisposed to sensitive skin, it can look like a wicker basket more than a brick wall.Howland: Adult eczema often occurs in patches on areas of the body prone to friction or sweat.Dr. Davis: Where your waistband would sit, where your socks or shoes would rub. If you have a watch, where you would wear your watch. If you have a headband or certain things that you wear along your neck, like a necklace or a tie.It's important to bathe regularly. It's important to hydrate the skin with a moisturizer that is hypoallergenic. It's important to monitor for infection.Howland: If those self-care steps don't help, your dermatologist may prescribe topical or oral medications, or other therapies.For Mayo Clinic News Network, I'm Jason Howland.In some people, atopic dermatitis is related to a gene variation that affects the skin's ability to provide protection. With a weak barrier function, the skin is less able to retain moisture and protect against bacteria, irritants, allergens and environmental factors — such as tobacco smoke.In other people, atopic dermatitis is caused by too much of the bacteria Staphylococcus aureus on the skin. This displaces helpful bacteria and disrupts the skin's barrier function.A weak skin barrier function might also trigger an immune system response that causes the inflamed skin and other symptoms.Atopic dermatitis (eczema) is one of several types of dermatitis. Other common types are contact dermatitis and seborrheic dermatitis (dandruff). Dermatitis isn't contagious.The main risk factor for atopic dermatitis is having had eczema, allergies, hay fever or asthma in the past. Having family members with these conditions also increases your risk.Complications of atopic dermatitis (eczema) may include:Developing a basic skin care routine may help prevent eczema flares. The following tips may help reduce the drying effects of bathing:Moisturize your skin at least twice a day. Creams, ointments, shea butter and lotions seal in moisture. Choose a product or products that work well for you. Ideally, the best one for you will be safe, effective, affordable and unscented.Using petroleum jelly on your baby's skin may help prevent development of atopic dermatitis.The triggers for atopic dermatitis vary widely from person to person. Try to identify and avoid irritants that trigger your eczema. In general, avoid anything that causes an itch because scratching often triggers a flare.Common triggers for atopic dermatitis include:Infants and children may have flares triggered by eating certain foods, such as eggs and cow's milk. Talk with your child's health care provider about identifying potential food allergies.Once you understand what triggers your eczema, talk with your health care provider about how to manage your symptoms and prevent flares.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Seek immediate medical attentionJason T. Howland:Dawn Marie R. Davis, M.D.:Howland:Dr. Davis:Howland:Dr. Davis:Howland:Asthma and hay fever.Food allergies.Chronic itchy, scaly skin.Patches of skin that's darker or lighter than the surrounding area.Skin infections.Irritant hand dermatitis.Allergic contact dermatitis.Sleep problems.Mental health conditions.Moisturize your skin at least twice a day.Take a daily bath or shower.Use a gentle, nonsoap cleanser.Pat dry.Advertising & Sponsorship