An atrial septal defect (ASD) is a heart condition that you're born with. That means it's a congenital heart defect. People with an ASD have a hole between the upper heart chambers. The hole increases the amount of blood going through the lungs.Small atrial septal defects might be found by chance and never cause a concern. Others might close during infancy or early childhood.A large, long-term atrial septal defect can damage the heart and lungs. Surgery may be needed to repair an atrial septal defect and to prevent complications.Types of atrial septal defects (ASDs) include:A baby born with an atrial septal defect (ASD) may not have symptoms. Symptoms may begin in adulthood.Atrial septal defect symptoms may include:Serious congenital heart defects are often diagnosed before or soon after a child is born.Get immediate emergency help if a child has trouble breathing.Call a healthcare professional if these symptoms occur:The cause of atrial septal defect is not clear. The problem affects the structure of the heart. It happens as the baby's heart is forming during pregnancy.The following may play a role in the cause of congenital heart defects such as atrial septal defect:A typical heart has two upper and two lower chambers. The upper chambers, the right and left atria, receive incoming blood. The lower chambers, the more muscular right and left ventricles, pump blood out of the heart. The heart valves are gates at the chamber openings. They keep blood flowing in the right direction.An atrial septal defect (ASD) is a hole between the heart's upper chambers. The heart problem is present at birth. It is a type of congenital heart defect.To understand the cause of atrial septal defect, it may be helpful to know how the heart typically works.The typical heart is made of four chambers. The two upper chambers are called the atria. The two lower chambers are called the ventricles.The right side of the heart moves blood to the lungs. In the lungs, blood picks up oxygen and then returns it to the heart's left side. The left side of the heart then pumps the blood through the body's main artery, called the aorta. The blood then goes out to the rest of the body.A large atrial septal defect can send extra blood to the lungs and cause the right side of the heart to work too hard. Without treatment, the right side of the heart grows larger over time and becomes weak. The blood pressure in the arteries in the lungs also can increase, causing pulmonary hypertension.Atrial septal defect (ASD) occurs as the baby's heart is forming during pregnancy. It is a congenital heart defect. Things that may increase a baby's risk of atrial septal defect or other heart problems present at birth include:Some types of congenital heart defects occur in families. This means they are inherited. Tell your care team if you or someone in your family had a heart problem present at birth. Screening by a genetic counselor can help show the risk of certain heart defects in future children.A small atrial septal defect might never cause any concern. Small atrial septal defects often close during infancy.Larger atrial septal defects can cause serious complications, including:Pulmonary hypertension can cause permanent lung damage. This complication, called Eisenmenger syndrome, most often occurs over many years. It sometimes happens in people with large atrial septal defects.Treatment can prevent or help manage many of these complications.If you have an atrial septal defect and are pregnant or thinking about becoming pregnant, talk to a care professional first. It's important to get proper prenatal care. A healthcare professional may suggest repairing the hole in the heart before getting pregnant. A large atrial septal defect or its complications can lead to a high-risk pregnancy.Because the cause of atrial septal defect (ASD) is not clear, prevention may not be possible. But getting good prenatal care is important. If you were born with an ASD, make an appointment for a health checkup before becoming pregnant.During this visit:Atrial septal defect (ASD) care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart & Blood Health support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.346 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 58 Replies Thu, Jun 20, 2024 106 Replies Wed, Jun 19, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Secundum.Primum.Sinus venosus.Coronary sinus.Talk about current health conditions and medicines.Review your family medical history.Ask about getting tested to see if you've had German measles, also called rubella.Advertising & Sponsorship