In a typical heart, a tiny group of cells at the sinus node sends out an electrical signal. The signal travels through the heart's upper chambers to the atrioventricular (AV) node. The signal then passes into the lower heart chambers, causing them to squeeze and pump out blood. In atrial fibrillation, electrical signals fire from many locations in the upper chambers, causing them to beat chaotically. Since the AV node doesn't prevent all of these chaotic signals from entering the lower chambers, the heart beats faster and irregularly.Atrial fibrillation (AFib) is an irregular and often very rapid heart rhythm. An irregular heart rhythm is called an arrhythmia. AFib can lead to blood clots in the heart. The condition also increases the risk of stroke, heart failure and other heart-related complications.During atrial fibrillation, the heart's upper chambers — called the atria — beat chaotically and irregularly. They beat out of sync with the lower heart chambers, called the ventricles. For many people, AFib may have no symptoms. But AFib may cause a fast, pounding heartbeat, shortness of breath or light-headedness.Episodes of atrial fibrillation may come and go, or they may be persistent. AFib itself usually isn't life-threatening. But it's a serious medical condition that needs proper treatment to prevent stroke.Treatment for atrial fibrillation may include medicines, therapy to shock the heart back to a regular rhythm and procedures to block faulty heart signals.A person with atrial fibrillation also may have a related heart rhythm problem called atrial flutter. The treatments for AFib and atrial flutter are similar.Symptoms of AFib may include:Some people with atrial fibrillation (AFib) don't notice any symptoms.Atrial fibrillation may be:If you have symptoms of atrial fibrillation, make an appointment for a health checkup. You may be referred to a doctor trained in heart diseases, called a cardiologist.If you have chest pain, seek immediate medical help. Chest pain could mean that you're having a heart attack.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesTo understand the causes of atrial fibrillation (AFib), it may be helpful to know how the heart typically beats.The heart has four chambers:Inside the upper right heart chamber is a group of cells called the sinus node. The sinus node makes the signals that starts each heartbeat.The signals move across the upper heart chambers. Next, the signals arrive at a group of cells called the AV node, where they usually slow down. The signals then go to the lower heart chambers.In a healthy heart, this signaling process usually goes smoothly. The resting heart rate is typically 60 to 100 beats a minute.But in atrial fibrillation, the signals in the upper chambers of the heart are chaotic. As a result, the upper chambers tremble or shake. The AV node is flooded with signals trying to get through to the lower heart chambers. This causes a fast and irregular heart rhythm.In people with AFib, the heart rate may range from 100 to 175 beats a minute.Problems with the heart's structure are the most common cause of atrial fibrillation (AFib).Heart diseases and health problems that can cause AFib include:Heart surgery or stress due to surgery or sickness may also cause AFib. Some people who have atrial fibrillation have no known heart disease or heart damage.Lifestyle habits that can trigger an AFib episode may include:Things that can increase the risk of atrial fibrillation (AFib) include:Blood clots are a dangerous complication of atrial fibrillation (AFib). Blood clots can lead to stroke.The risk of stroke from AFib increases as you grow older. Other health conditions also may increase the risk of a stroke due to AFib. These conditions include:Blood thinners are commonly prescribed to prevent blood clots and strokes in people with atrial fibrillation.Healthy lifestyle choices can reduce the risk of heart disease and may prevent atrial fibrillation (AFib). Here are some basic heart-healthy tips:Atrial fibrillation care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart Rhythm Conditions support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.414 Replies Tue, May 28, 2024 93 Replies Thu, May 23, 2024 28 Replies Sat, May 04, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Occasional, also called paroxysmal atrial fibrillation.Persistent.Long-standing persistent.Permanent.Age.Caffeine, nicotine or illegal drug use.Drinking too much alcohol.Changes in the level of body minerals.Family history.Heart problems or heart surgery.High blood pressure.Obesity.Other long-term health conditions.Some medicines and supplements.Thyroid disease.Advertising & Sponsorship