Atrioventricular canal defect is a mix of problems affecting the center of the heart. The heart condition is present at birth. That means it's a congenital heart defect. Children born with this condition have a hole in the wall between the heart's chambers. They also have problems with the valves that control blood flow in the heart.Atrioventricular canal defect allows extra blood to flow to the lungs. The extra blood forces the heart to work too hard, causing the heart muscle to grow larger.Untreated, atrioventricular canal defect can cause heart failure and high blood pressure in the lungs. Treatment usually involves surgery during the first year of life to close the hole in the heart and to repair the valves.Other names for this condition are:Atrioventricular canal defect can involve only the two upper chambers of the heart or all four chambers. In both types, extra blood flows into the lungs. Symptoms depend on whether the defect is partial or complete.The condition affects all of the heart's chambers. Symptoms of a complete atrioventricular canal defect usually develop in the first weeks of life. Symptoms are generally similar to those of heart failure. They may include:The condition affects only the two upper heart chambers. Symptoms of a partial atrioventricular canal defect may not appear until early adulthood. The symptoms may be due to complications such as heart valve problems, high blood pressure in the lungs or heart failure. Symptoms may include:Atrioventricular canal defect occurs before birth when a baby's heart is developing. Experts aren't sure of the cause. Having Down syndrome might increase the risk.To understand congenital heart defects, it may be helpful to know how the heart typically works.The heart is divided into chambers. The two upper chambers are called the atria. The two lower chambers are called the ventricles.The right side of the heart moves blood into vessels that lead to the lungs, where the blood receives oxygen. The oxygen-rich blood flows back to the heart's left side and into the body's main artery, called the aorta. From there, the blood flows to the rest of the body.Valves control blood flow into and out of the heart chambers. These heart valves open to let blood in and close to keep blood from flowing backward. A typical heart has two upper and two lower chambers. The upper chambers, the right and left atria, receive incoming blood. The lower chambers, the more muscular right and left ventricles, pump blood out of the heart. The heart valves, which keep blood flowing in the right direction, are gates at the chamber openings. In a partial atrioventricular canal defect:In a complete atrioventricular canal defect: Atrioventricular canal defect is a type of congenital heart defect. A person born with atrioventricular canal defect has a hole in the wall separating the heart's chambers and problems with the heart valves. The condition may be partial, involving only the two upper chambers, or complete, involving all four chambers. Things that might increase the risk of atrioventricular canal defect include:Possible complications of atrioventricular canal defect include:Treatment greatly improves the outlook for children with atrioventricular canal defect. But complications may still occur later in life. They may include:Those who had atrioventricular canal defect surgery before permanent lung damage occurred are often able to have a successful pregnancy. Pregnancy is not recommended if you had serious heart or lung damage before atrioventricular canal defect surgery.Before becoming pregnant, talk to a heart doctor trained in congenital heart disease about the possible risks and complications. This type of care provider is called an adult congenital cardiologist. Together you can discuss and plan for any special care needed during pregnancy.There is no known prevention for atrioventricular canal defect.Some heart problems are passed down in families, which means they are inherited. If you have a family or personal history of congenital heart disease, talk with a genetic counselor and a cardiologist before getting pregnant.Sep 13, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.