Atrioventricular nodal reentry tachycardia (AVNRT) is a type of irregular heartbeat, also called an arrhythmia. It is the most common type of supraventricular tachycardia.People with AVNRT have an irregularly fast heartbeat that often starts and ends suddenly. In AVNRT, the heart beats more than 100 times a minute. The condition is due to a change in heart signaling. There is an extra pathway for heart signals to travel, called a reentrant circuit. That extra pathway causes the heart to beat too early.AVNRT tends to occur more often in young women. But anyone can have it at any age. AVNRT may not need treatment. When recommended, treatment may include specific actions or movements, medicines, or a heart procedure.Tests used to diagnose atrioventricular nodal reentry tachycardia (AVNRT) may include:A healthcare professional might try to trigger AVNRT with other tests, which may include:Supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) is an irregularly fast or erratic heartbeat. It occurs when faulty electrical signaling in the heart set off a series of early beats in the upper chambers of the heart.Most people with atrioventricular nodal reentry tachycardia (AVNRT) don't need treatment. But if the fast heartbeat occurs often or lasts a long time, treatment may be needed. Treatment for AVNRT may include:Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart Rhythm Conditions support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.29 Replies Tue, Jun 25, 2024 414 Replies Tue, May 28, 2024 93 Replies Thu, May 23, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Blood testsElectrocardiogram (ECG)Holter monitorEchocardiogram,Exercise stress test,Electrophysiological study and cardiac mapping,Vagal maneuvers.Cardioversion.Medicines.Catheter ablation.Advertising & Sponsorship