Auditory processing disorder, also called APD, is a type of hearing loss caused by something affecting the part of the brain that processes how you hear. Ear damage causes other types of hearing loss.APD is also sometimes called central auditory processing disorder (CAPD). It can happen in anyone. But it most often happens in children and older adults.Many conditions can affect how well a person understands what they hear, such as attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) or autism. But these conditions are different from auditory processing disorder, although they can appear with APD. APD also can happen with other types of hearing loss.Auditory processing disorder has no cure. But treatments can help you hear better.Symptoms of auditory processing disorder (APD) can be subtle. Symptoms can include having trouble with:If you have APD, you also might:APD is often seen with attention, language and learning issues like those seen in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, or ADHD.If you have trouble hearing or understanding what you hear, talk to a health care professional.The cause of auditory processing disorder (APD) is sometimes unknown. APD can be linked to many conditions. In older adults, conditions might include stroke and head trauma. In children, APD can be linked to issues at birth, such as low birth weight or early birth, or repeated ear infections.In typical hearing, the brain's auditory center takes the sound waves sent from the ears and turns them into sounds you know. But with auditory processing disorder (APD), the auditory part of the brain can't do this.Factors that increase your risk of auditory processing disorder (APD) include:Auditory processing disorder (APD) complications include:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship