Autoimmune hepatitis is a liver disease that happens when the body's immune system attacks the liver. This can cause swelling, irritation and damage to the liver. The exact cause of autoimmune hepatitis is unclear, but genetic and environmental factors appear to interact over time to trigger the disease.Untreated autoimmune hepatitis can lead to scarring of the liver, called cirrhosis. It can also eventually lead to liver failure. When diagnosed and treated early, however, autoimmune hepatitis often can be controlled with medicines that suppress the immune system.A liver transplant may be an option when autoimmune hepatitis doesn't respond to medicines or liver disease becomes advanced.Symptoms of autoimmune hepatitis vary from person to person and may come on suddenly. Some people have few, if any, recognized problems in the early stages of the disease, whereas others experience symptoms that may include:Make an appointment with a healthcare professional if you have any symptoms that worry you.Autoimmune hepatitis occurs when the body's immune system, which usually attacks viruses, bacteria and other causes of disease, instead targets the liver. This attack on the liver can lead to long-lasting inflammation and serious damage to liver cells. Just why the body turns against itself is unclear, but researchers think autoimmune hepatitis could be caused by the interaction of genes controlling immune system function and exposure to viruses or medicines.Experts have identified two main forms of autoimmune hepatitis.Factors that may increase your risk of autoimmune hepatitis include:Esophageal varices are enlarged veins in the esophagus. They're often due to obstructed blood flow through the portal vein, which carries blood from the intestine to the liver.Autoimmune hepatitis that goes untreated can cause permanent scarring of the liver tissue, known as cirrhosis. Complications of cirrhosis include:Enlarged veins in the esophagus, called esophageal varices. The portal vein carries blood from the intestine to the liver. When circulation through the portal vein is blocked, blood may back up into other blood vessels, mainly those in the stomach and esophagus.These blood vessels have thin walls. And because they become filled with more blood than they're meant to carry, they're likely to bleed. Massive bleeding in the esophagus or stomach from these blood vessels is a life-threatening emergency that needs immediate medical care.Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Transplants support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.1606 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 15 Replies Fri, Jun 21, 2024 100 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Type 1 autoimmune hepatitis.Type 2 autoimmune hepatitis.Being female.Genetics.Having an autoimmune disease.Enlarged veins in the esophagus, called esophageal varices.Fluid in the abdomen, called ascites (uh-SY-teez).Liver failure.Liver cancer.Advertising & Sponsorship