Autoimmune pancreatitis is an inflammation in the pancreas. It may be caused by the immune system attacking the pancreas. Autoimmune pancreatitis also is called AIP. Two subtypes of AIP are now recognized, type 1 and type 2.Type 1 AIP is called IgG4-related disease (IgG4-RD). This type often affects multiple organs, including the pancreas, bile ducts in the liver, salivary glands, kidneys and lymph nodes.Type 2 AIP seems to affect only the pancreas, although about one-third of people with type 2 AIP have associated inflammatory bowel disease.Type 1 AIP can be mistakenly diagnosed as pancreatic cancer. The two conditions have overlapping symptoms, but very different treatments, so it is very important to distinguish one from the other.Autoimmune pancreatitis, also called AIP, is difficult to diagnose. Often, it doesn't cause any symptoms. Symptoms of type 1 AIP are like those of pancreatic cancer.Pancreatic cancer symptoms can include:The most common sign of type 1 AIP is painless jaundice. About 80% of people with type 1 AIP have painless jaundice. This is caused by blocked bile ducts. People with type 2 AIP can have repeat episodes of acute pancreatitis. Pain in the upper abdomen, a common symptom of pancreatic cancer, is often absent in autoimmune pancreatitis.Differences between type 1 and type 2 AIP are:Autoimmune pancreatitis often doesn't cause any symptoms. See a healthcare professional, however, if you have unexplained weight loss, belly pain, jaundice or other symptoms that bother you.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care.If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.Please, try again in a couple of minutesExperts don't know what causes autoimmune pancreatitis, but it is thought to be caused by the body's immune system attacking healthy body tissue. This is known as an autoimmune disease.The two types of AIP happen with different frequency in different parts of the world. In the United States, about 80% of people with autoimmune pancreatitis, also called AIP, have type 1.People with type 1 AIP often:People with type 2 AIP:Autoimmune pancreatitis can cause a variety of complications.Treatments for autoimmune pancreatitis, such as long-term steroid use, can cause complications. However, even with these complications, people who are treated for autoimmune pancreatitis have a typical life expectancy.There is no established association between AIP and pancreatic cancer.Autoimmune pancreatitis care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Pancreatic exocrine insufficiency.Diabetes.Pancreatic and bile duct narrowing, called stricture.Pancreatic calcifications or stones.Advertising & Sponsorship