Autonomic neuropathy occurs when there is damage to the nerves that control automatic body functions. It can affect blood pressure, temperature control, digestion, bladder function and even sexual function.The nerve damage affects the messages sent between the brain and other organs and areas of the autonomic nervous system. These areas include the heart, blood vessels and sweat glands.Diabetes is the most common cause of autonomic neuropathy. It can also be caused by other health conditions, viral or bacterial infections, or some medications. Symptoms and treatment vary based on which nerves are damaged.Signs and symptoms of autonomic neuropathy depend on which nerves are damaged. They might include:Seek medical care promptly if you begin having any of the signs and symptoms of autonomic neuropathy, particularly if you have diabetes that's poorly controlled.If you have type 2 diabetes, the American Diabetes Association recommends annual autonomic neuropathy screening beginning when you receive your diagnosis. For people with type 1 diabetes, the association advises annual screening beginning five years after diagnosis.Many health conditions can cause autonomic neuropathy. It can also be a side effect of treatments for other diseases, such as cancer. Some common causes of autonomic neuropathy include:Autoimmune diseases, in which your immune system attacks and damages parts of your body, including your nerves. Examples include Sjogren syndrome, systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis and celiac disease. Guillain-Barre syndrome is an autoimmune disease that happens rapidly and can affect autonomic nerves.Autonomic neuropathy may also be caused by an immune system attack triggered by some cancers (paraneoplastic syndrome).Factors that might increase your risk of autonomic neuropathy include:Certain inherited diseases that put you at risk of developing autonomic neuropathy can't be prevented. But you can slow the onset or progression of symptoms by taking care of your health in general and managing your medical conditions.To control diseases and conditions, follow your health care provider's advice on healthy living. That advice might include these recommendations:Jul 07, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.