Back pain is one of the most common reasons people seek medical help or miss work. Back pain is a leading cause of disability worldwide.Fortunately, measures can help prevent or relieve most back pain episodes, especially for people younger than age 60. If prevention fails, simple home treatment and using the body correctly often will heal the back within a few weeks. Surgery is rarely needed to treat back pain.Back pain can range from a muscle aching to a shooting, burning or stabbing sensation. Also, the pain can radiate down a leg. Bending, twisting, lifting, standing or walking can make it worse.Most back pain gradually improves with home treatment and self-care, usually within a few weeks. Contact your health care provider for back pain that:In rare cases, back pain can signal a serious medical problem. Seek immediate care for back pain that:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesBack pain often develops without a cause that shows up in a test or imaging study. Conditions commonly linked to back pain include:Anyone can develop back pain, even children and teens. These factors can increase the risk of developing back pain:Improving one's physical condition and learning and practicing how to use the body might help prevent back pain.To keep the back healthy and strong:Avoid movements that twist or strain the back. To use the body properly:Because back pain is common, many products promise prevention or relief. But there's no good evidence that special shoes, shoe inserts, back supports or specially designed furniture can help.In addition, there doesn't appear to be one type of mattress that's best for people with back pain. It's probably a matter of what feels most comfortable.Our patients tell us that the quality of their interactions, our attention to detail and the efficiency of their visits mean health care like they've never experienced. See the stories of satisfied Mayo Clinic patients.Edward Markle was desperate. Despite receiving nerve blocks from his doctors, Edward says the pain from two herniated discs had become excruciating and unrelenting. He could not sit or walk without pain. He slept on the floor, two hours a night. He was increasingly worried about the future. "It shut my quality of life down to almost zero," he says. "I couldn't move. I could not get out. I could not find a way to…Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Muscle or ligament strain.Bulging or ruptured disks.Arthritis.Osteoporosis.Ankylosing spondylitis, also called axial spondyloarthritis.Age.Lack of exercise.Excess weight.Diseases.Improper lifting.Psychological conditions.Smoking.Exercise.Build muscle strength and flexibility.Maintain a healthy weight.Quit smoking.Stand smart.Sit smart.Lift smart.Advertising & Sponsorship