Bacterial vaginosis (BV) can cause discomfort and pain of the vagina. It happens when natural bacteria levels are out of balance. Balanced levels of bacteria help keep the vagina healthy. But when too much of some bacteria grow, it can lead to BV.Bacterial vaginosis can happen at any age. But it's most common during the reproductive years. The changes in hormones during this time make it easier for certain kinds of bacteria to grow. Also, bacterial vaginosis is more common among those who are sexually active. It's not clear why this is. But activities such as unprotected sex and douching raise your risk of having BV.Symptoms of bacterial vaginosis include:Many people with bacterial vaginosis have no symptoms.Make an appointment to see a health care professional if:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Get the latest information from our Mayo Clinic experts on women’s health topics, serious and complex conditions, wellness and more. Click to view a preview and subscribe below.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesBacterial vaginosis happens when the vagina's natural bacteria levels are out of balance. The bacteria in the vagina are called the vaginal flora. Balanced vaginal flora help keep the vagina healthy. Usually "good" bacteria outnumber "bad" bacteria. The good bacteria are called lactobacilli; the bad bacteria are anaerobes. When there are too many anaerobes, they upset the balance of the flora, causing bacterial vaginosis.Risk factors for bacterial vaginosis include:Bacterial vaginosis doesn't cause complications very often. But sometimes, having BV may lead to:To help prevent bacterial vaginosis:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Having different sex partners or a new sex partner.Douching.Natural lack of lactobacilli bacteria.Sexually transmitted infections.Infection risk after gynecological surgery.Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID).Pregnancy issues.Don't use scented products.Don't douche.Practice safe sex.Advertising & Sponsorship