Balance problems can make you feel dizzy, as if the room is spinning, unsteady, or lightheaded. You might feel as if the room is spinning or you're going to fall down. These feelings can happen whether you're lying down, sitting or standing.Many body systems — including your muscles, bones, joints, eyes, the balance organ in the inner ear, nerves, heart and blood vessels — must work normally for you to have normal balance. When these systems aren't functioning well, you can experience balance problems.Many medical conditions can cause balance problems. However, most balance problems result from issues in your balance organ in the inner ear (vestibular system).Signs and symptoms of balance problems include:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesBalance problems can be caused by several different conditions. The cause of balance problems is usually related to the specific sign or symptom.Vertigo can be associated with many conditions, including:Lightheadedness can be associated with:Losing your balance while walking, or feeling imbalanced, can result from:A sense of dizziness or lightheadedness can result from:Balance problems care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV).Vestibular neuritis.Persistent postural-perceptual dizziness.Meniere's disease.Migraine.Acoustic neuroma.Ramsay Hunt syndrome.Head injury.Motion sickness.Hemodynamic orthostatic hypotension (postural hypotension).Cardiovascular disease.Vestibular problems.Nerve damage to your legs (peripheral neuropathy).Joint, muscle or vision problems.Medications.Certain neurological conditions.Inner ear problems.Psychiatric disorders.Abnormally rapid breathing (hyperventilation).Medications.Advertising & Sponsorship