Bedsores are areas of damaged skin and tissue caused by sustained pressure that reduces blood flow to vulnerable areas of the body. This pressure may be caused from being in a bed or wheelchair for a long time.Bedsores are injuries to the skin and the tissue below the skin that are due to pressure on the skin for a long time. Bedsores most often arise on skin that covers bony areas of the body, such as the heels, ankles, hips and tailbone. Bedsores also are called pressure ulcers, pressure injuries and decubitus ulcers.The people who are most at risk of bedsores have medical conditions that keep them from changing positions or moving. Or they spend most of their time in a bed or a chair.Bedsores can arise over hours or days. Most sores heal with treatment, but some never heal completely. You can take steps to put a stop to bedsores and help them heal.Symptoms of bedsores are:Bedsores fall into one of several stages based on their depth, how serious they are and other features. The degree of skin and tissue damage ranges from inflamed, unbroken skin to a deep injury involving muscle and bone.For people who use wheelchairs, bedsores often occur on skin over these areas:For people who need to stay in bed, bedsores may happen on the:If you notice warning signs of a bedsore, change your position to ease pressure on the area. If the area doesn't improve in 24 to 48 hours, contact your healthcare professional.Seek medical care right away if you notice signs of infection. These include fever, drainage from a sore or a sore that smells bad, as well as warmth or swelling around a sore.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesPressure against the skin that limits blood flow to the skin causes bedsores. Limited movement can make skin prone to damage and cause bedsores.The three main things that lead to bedsores are:Your risk of getting bedsores is higher if you have a hard time moving and can't change position easily while seated or in bed. Risk factors include:Complications of pressure ulcers include:Some complications can be life-threatening.You can help stop bedsores with these steps:Consider these recommendations related to changing position in a bed or chair:Consider these suggestions for skin care:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Pressure.Friction.Shear.Immobility.Incontinence.Lack of sensory perception.Poor nutrition and hydration.Medical conditions affecting blood flow.Age.Cellulitis.Bone and joint infections.Cancer.Sepsis.Shift your weight frequently.Lift yourself, if possible.Look into a specialty wheelchair.Select cushions or a mattress that relieves pressure.Adjust the height of your bed.Keep skin clean and dry.Protect the skin.Inspect the skin daily.Advertising & Sponsorship