Bell's palsy is a condition that causes sudden weakness in the muscles on one side of the face. Often the weakness is short-term and improves over weeks. The weakness makes half of the face appear to droop. Smiles are one-sided, and the eye on the affected side is hard to close.Bell's palsy also is known as acute peripheral facial palsy of unknown cause. It can occur at any age. The exact cause is not known. Experts think it's caused by swelling and irritation of the nerve that controls the muscles on one side of the face. Bell's palsy could be caused by a reaction that occurs after a viral infection.Symptoms usually start to improve within a few weeks, with complete recovery in about six months. A small number of people continue to have some Bell's palsy symptoms for life. Rarely, Bell's palsy occurs more than once.The nerve that controls facial muscles passes through a narrow corridor of bone on its way to the face. Facial weakness or paralysis may cause one corner of the mouth to droop, and the mouth may not be able to retain saliva on the paralyzed side of the face. The condition also may make it difficult to close the eye on the affected side of the face.Symptoms of Bell's palsy come on suddenly and may include:Rarely, Bell's palsy can affect the nerves on both sides of the face.Seek medical help right away if you experience any type of paralysis because you may be having a stroke. Bell's palsy is not caused by a stroke, but the symptoms of both conditions are similar.If you have facial weakness or drooping, see your healthcare professional to find out the cause and the severity of the illness.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesAlthough the exact reason Bell's palsy occurs isn't clear, it's often related to having a viral infection. Viruses that have been linked to Bell's palsy include viruses that cause:The nerve that controls facial muscles passes through a narrow corridor of bone on its way to the face. In Bell's palsy, that nerve becomes inflamed and swollen — usually related to a viral infection. Besides affecting facial muscles, the nerve affects tears, saliva, taste and a small bone in the middle of the ear.Bell's palsy occurs more often in people who:It's rare for Bell's palsy to come back. But when it does, there's often a family history of repeated attacks. This suggests that Bell's palsy might have something to do with genes.Mild symptoms of Bell's palsy typically disappear within a month. Recovery from more-complete facial paralysis can vary. Complications may include:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship