Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is a health issue that becomes more common with age. It's also called an enlarged prostate. The prostate is a small gland that helps make semen. It's found just below the bladder. And it often gets bigger as you get older.An enlarged prostate can cause symptoms that may bother you, such as blocking the flow of urine out of the bladder. It also can cause bladder, urinary tract or kidney problems.Many treatments can help BPH. These include medicines, surgery and other procedures. Your health care provider can help you choose. The right option depends on things such as:Common symptoms of BPH include:Less common symptoms include:The symptoms of BPH tend to slowly get worse. But sometimes they stay the same or even improve over time.The size of the prostate doesn't always determine how serious the symptoms are. Some people with slightly enlarged prostates can have major symptoms. Others who have very enlarged prostates can have minor problems. And some people with enlarged prostates don't have any symptoms at all.Some other health problems can lead to symptoms that are like those caused by enlarged prostate. These include:Some medicines also may lead to symptoms that seem like those caused by BPH. These include: Talk to your health care provider about your symptoms, even if they don't bother you. It's important to find out if there are any causes that could be treated. Without treatment, the risk of a dangerous blockage of the urinary tract can rise.If you can't pass any urine, get medical help right away.Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your health concerns. Visit Mayo Clinic Men's Health to get started.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesUsually, the prostate gland is about the size and shape of a walnut or golf ball. When enlarged, the prostate may block the flow of urine from the bladder to the outside of the body.The prostate gland is located beneath the bladder. The tube that moves urine from the bladder out of the penis is called the urethra. This tube passes through the center of the prostate. When the prostate gets bigger, it starts to block urine flow.The prostate is a gland that typically keeps growing throughout life. This growth often enlarges the prostate enough to cause symptoms or to block urine flow.It isn't clear what causes the prostate to get bigger. It might be due to changes in the balance of sex hormones as you grow older.Risk factors for an enlarged prostate include:Complications of an enlarged prostate can include:Treatment for BPH lowers the risk of these complications. But urinary retention and kidney damage can be serious health threats.Having an enlarged prostate is not thought to raise the risk of getting prostate cancer.For more information on on benign prostatic hyperplasia treatment at Mayo Clinic, visit the Mayo Clinic Men's Health Center.Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Aging.Family history.Diabetes and heart disease.Lifestyle.Not being able to pee.Urinary tract infections (UTIs).Bladder stones.Bladder damage.Kidney damage.Advertising & Sponsorship