Located on top of each kidney, the adrenal glands make hormones that help regulate metabolism, the immune system, blood pressure and other important functions. Although small, these glands control much of what happens in the body.Benign adrenal tumors are masses that aren't cancer. They form in the adrenal glands. The adrenal glands are part of the endocrine system. These glands make hormones that send messages to nearly every organ and tissue in the body.There are two adrenal glands, one above each kidney. Each gland has two types of tissue: the cortex and the medulla. Benign adrenal tumors that grow in the cortex are called adrenal adenomas. Those that grow in the medulla are called pheochromocytomas (fee-o-kroe-moe-sy-TOE-muhs).Most benign adrenal tumors cause no symptoms and don't need treatment. But sometimes these tumors make high levels of some hormones that can cause problems. Hormones from the cortex control metabolism, blood pressure and certain body features, such as hair growth. Hormones from the medulla control the body's response to stress.Symptoms depend on whether the tumor makes hormones, what hormone it makes and how much it makes. But many benign adrenal gland tumors don't cause symptoms because they don't make hormones.The most common type of benign adrenal tumor, called adenoma, comes from the adrenal cortex. This type of tumor might cause symptoms such as:A type of benign adrenal tumor from the medulla is called pheochromocytoma. It might cause the following symptoms:The cause of benign adrenal tumors often is not known.The following might raise the risk of developing a benign adrenal tumor:Benign adrenal tumors care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship