Black hairy tongue is caused by a buildup of dead skin cells on the tiny bumps on the tongue called papillae. Food, drinks, tobacco, bacteria or yeast, and other substances can get trapped on the papillae and stain them.Black hairy tongue is a condition of the tongue that gives it a dark, furry look. The look usually results from a buildup of dead skin cells on the many tiny, rounded bumps on the surface of the tongue. These bumps, called papillae, contain taste buds. When these bumps become longer than usual, they can easily trap and be stained by tobacco, food, drinks, bacteria or yeast, or other substances.Black hairy tongue may look alarming, but it's usually painless and doesn't cause any health problems. The condition usually goes away by dealing with the causes and by regular mouth and tongue cleaning.Symptoms of black hairy tongue include:Though it doesn't look good, black hairy tongue is usually a harmless condition. It's usually short term when steps are taken to get rid of or manage the cause.See your healthcare professional or dentist if:Black hairy tongue usually happens when the many tiny, rounded bumps on the tongue, called papillae, grow too long because they don't shed dead skin cells. Food, drinks, tobacco, bacteria or yeast, and other substances can get trapped on the papillae and stain them. This makes the tongue look dark and hairy.The cause of black hairy tongue can't always be found. Possible causes of black hairy tongue include:Poor mouth and tongue cleaning, dry mouth, and eating only soft foods may raise your risk of black hairy tongue.If you're male or an older adult, if you smoke, or if you've had hairy black tongue in the past, you may have a higher risk of the condition.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship