Blastocystis is a microscopic parasite that can live in your digestive tract. Researchers don't fully understand the role blastocystis plays, if any, in causing disease. Some people experiencing diarrhea, abdominal pain or other gastrointestinal problems have blastocystis organisms in their stool.Most commonly, however, blastocystis organisms simply live in a person's digestive tract without causing harm.Blastocystis may be transmitted through food or water or by contact with human or animal feces. Blastocystis infection is generally more common among people who live in or travel to developing countries and among people who work with animals.Blastocystis in humans was once identified as a single species, Blastocystis hominis. Researchers have found several variations — either different species or different strains within a species. The scientific name used now is Blastocystis spp, an abbreviation that means "multiple species." A blastocystis infection is called blastocystosis.Signs and symptoms possibly associated with blastocystis include:See your doctor if you have signs and symptoms, such as diarrhea or abdominal pain, that lasts longer than three days.Blastocystis is a microscopic single-celled organism (protozoan). Many parasitic protozoans normally live in your digestive tract and are harmless or even helpful; others cause disease. Blastocystis is a microscopic single-cell organism (protozoan) that lives in the digestive tract. Many protozoans normally live in the digestive tract and are harmless or even helpful, but some cause disease. It's not clear whether blastocystis causes disease. Most people who carry the organism have no signs or symptoms, but it's also found in people who have diarrhea and other digestive problems.Explanations for this variability include:Blastocystis can be passed between people and from animals to people. Transmission may be from:Blastocystis is common, but you may have a greater risk of exposure if you:If you have diarrhea associated with blastocystis, it's likely to be self-limiting. However, anytime you have diarrhea, you lose vital fluids, salts and minerals, which can lead to dehydration. Children are especially vulnerable to dehydration.The best practice for preventing blastocystis infection is practicing good hygiene:Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds. When you can't use soap and water, use a hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol.Wash your hands frequently, particularly:When you travel, you can take steps to lower your risk of exposure to blastocystis. A general guideline is to avoid eating what you can't boil, cook or peel. More specifically, avoid:If you're visiting a country with poor sanitation or possible unsafe drinking water, use the following tips:Feb 09, 2023CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.