When you have a blocked tear duct, your tears can't drain normally, leaving you with a watery, irritated eye. The condition is caused by a partial or complete obstruction in the tear drainage system. The tear glands located above each eyeball, called the lacrimal glands, continuously supply tear fluid that's wiped across the surface of your eye each time you blink your eyelids. Excess fluid drains through the tear ducts into the nose. A blocked tear duct is common in newborns. The condition usually gets better without any treatment during the first year of life. In adults a blocked tear duct may be due to an injury, an infection or rarely, a tumor.A blocked tear duct is almost always correctable. Treatment depends on the cause of the blockage and the age of the affected person.Symptoms of a blocked tear duct include:See your health care provider if you tear constantly for several days or if your eye is repeatedly or continually infected. A blocked tear duct may be caused by a tumor pressing on the tear drainage system. Early identification of the tumor can give you more treatment options.Blocked tear ducts can happen at any age, from birth to adulthood. Causes include:The lacrimal glands produce most of your tears. These glands are located inside the upper lids above each eye. Typically, tears flow from the lacrimal glands over the surface of your eye. Tears drain into openings, called puncta, on the inside corners of your upper and lower eyelids.The puncta lead to small canals called canaliculi. Canaliculi move tears to a sac to a reservoir on the side of the nose called the lacrimal sac. From there tears travel down the nasolacrimal duct and drain into your nose. Once in the nose, tears are reabsorbed.A blockage can occur at any point in the tear drainage system, from the puncta to your nose. When that happens, your tears don't drain properly, giving you watery eyes and increasing your risk of eye infections and inflammation.Certain factors increase your risk of developing a blocked tear duct:Because your tears aren't draining the way they should, the tears that remain in the drainage system become stagnant. This promotes growth of bacteria, viruses and fungi, which can lead to frequent eye infections and inflammation.Any part of the tear drainage system, including the clear membrane over your eye surface known as the conjunctiva, can become infected or inflamed because of a blocked tear duct.To reduce your risk of developing a blocked tear duct later in life, get prompt treatment of eye inflammation or infections. Follow these tips to avoid eye infections in the first place:Mar 08, 2023CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.