A boil is a painful, pus-filled bump that forms under your skin when bacteria infect and inflame one or more of your hair follicles. A carbuncle is a cluster of boils that form a connected area of infection under the skin.Boils (furuncles) usually start as reddish or purplish, tender bumps. The bumps quickly fill with pus, growing larger and more painful until they rupture and drain. Areas most likely to be affected are the face, back of the neck, armpits, thighs and buttocks.You can usually care for a single boil at home. But don't attempt to prick or squeeze it — that may spread the infection. A boil is a painful, pus-filled bump under your skin the result of a bacterial infection of one or more hair follicles. A carbuncle is a cluster of boils painful, pus-filled bumps that form a connected area of infection under the skin. Boils can occur anywhere on your skin, but appear mainly on the face, back of the neck, armpits, thighs and buttocks — hair-bearing areas where you're most likely to sweat or experience friction. Signs and symptoms of a boil usually include:A carbuncle is a cluster of boils that form a connected area of infection. Compared with single boils, carbuncles cause a deeper and more severe infection and are more likely to leave a scar. People who have a carbuncle often feel unwell in general and may experience a fever and chills.You usually can care for a single, small boil yourself. But see your doctor if you have more than one boil at a time or if a boil:Most boils are caused by Staphylococcus aureus, a type of bacterium commonly found on the skin and inside the nose. A bump forms as pus collects under the skin. Boils sometimes develop at sites where the skin has been broken by a small injury or an insect bite, which gives the bacteria easy entry.Although anyone — including otherwise healthy people — can develop boils or carbuncles, the following factors can increase your risk:Rarely, bacteria from a boil or carbuncle can enter your bloodstream and travel to other parts of your body. The spreading infection, commonly known as blood poisoning (sepsis), can lead to infections deep within your body, such as your heart (endocarditis) and bone (osteomyelitis).It's not always possible to prevent boils, especially if you have a weakened immune system. But the following measures may help you avoid staph infections:Sep 18, 2021CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.