The brachial plexus is the group of nerves that sends signals from the spinal cord to the shoulder, arm and hand. A brachial plexus injury happens when these nerves are stretched, squeezed together, or in the most serious cases, ripped apart or torn away from the spinal cord.Minor brachial plexus injuries, called stingers or burners, are common in contact sports, such as football. Babies sometimes get brachial plexus injuries when they're born. Other health issues, such as inflammation or tumors, may affect the brachial plexus.The most serious brachial plexus injuries happen during car or motorcycle accidents. Bad brachial plexus injuries can leave the arm paralyzed, but surgery may help.The brachial plexus is the network of nerves that send signals from your spine to your shoulder, arm and hand.Part of the spine (on left) shows how nerve roots connect to the spinal cord. The most serious types of nerve injuries are an avulsion (A), where the nerve roots are torn away from the spinal cord, and rupture (C), where the nerve is torn into two pieces. A less serious injury is stretching (B) of the nerve fibers.Symptoms of a brachial plexus injury can differ depending on how serious the injury is and where it's located. Usually only one arm is affected.Minor damage often happens during contact sports, such as football or wrestling, when the brachial plexus nerves get stretched or squeezed together. These are called stingers or burners. Some of the symptoms are:These symptoms usually last only a few seconds or minutes, but in some people the symptoms may last for days or longer.More-serious symptoms happen when an injury seriously damages or even tears or ruptures the nerves. The most serious brachial plexus injury is when the nerve root is cut or torn from the spinal cord.Symptoms of serious injuries can include:Brachial plexus injuries can cause lasting weakness or disability. Even if yours seems minor, you may need medical care. See your healthcare provider if you have:Brachial plexus injuries in the upper nerves happen when the shoulder is forced down on one side of the body and the head is pushed to the other side in the opposite direction. The lower nerves are more likely to be injured when the arm is forced above the head.These injuries can happen in many ways, including:Playing contact sports, especially football and wrestling, or being in high-speed motor vehicle accidents increases the risk of brachial plexus injury.Many mild brachial plexus injuries heal over time with few to no issues. But some injuries can cause short-term or lasting problems, such as:Although a brachial plexus injury can't always be avoided, you can take steps to reduce your risk of complications after getting hurt:For yourself. If you can't use the hand or arm for a short time, daily range-of-motion exercises and physical therapy can help prevent joint stiffness. Avoid burns or cuts, as you may not feel them if you have numbness.If you're an athlete with a brachial plexus injury, your healthcare professional may suggest that you wear padding to protect the area when you play sports.Brachial plexus injury care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Contact sports.Birth.Injuries.Tumors and cancer treatments.Stiff joints.Pain.Numbness.Muscle atrophy.Permanent disability.For yourself.For your child.Advertising & Sponsorship