Bradycardia (brad-e-KAHR-dee-uh) is a slow heart rate. The hearts of adults at rest usually beat between 60 and 100 times a minute. If you have bradycardia, your heart beats fewer than 60 times a minute.Bradycardia can be a serious problem if the heart rate is very slow and the heart can't pump enough oxygen-rich blood to the body. If this happens, you may feel dizzy, very tired or weak, and short of breath. Sometimes bradycardia doesn't cause symptoms or complications.A slow heart rate isn't always a concern. For example, a resting heart rate between 40 and 60 beats a minute is quite common during sleep and in some people, particularly healthy young adults and trained athletes.If bradycardia is severe, an implanted pacemaker may be needed to help the heart maintain an appropriate rate.A slower than typical heartbeat (bradycardia) can prevent the brain and other organs from getting enough oxygen, possibly causing these signs and symptoms:Many things can cause signs and symptoms of bradycardia. It's important to get a prompt, accurate diagnosis and appropriate care. See your health care provider if you are concerned about a slow heart rate.If you faint, have difficulty breathing or have chest pain lasting more than a few minutes, call 911 or emergency medical services.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesIn a typical heart rhythm, a tiny cluster of cells at the sinus node sends out an electrical signal. The signal then travels through the atria to the atrioventricular (AV) node and then passes into the ventricles, causing them to contract and pump out blood.Bradycardia can be caused by:To better understand the causes of bradycardia, it may be helpful to know how the heart typically beats.The typical heart has four chambers — two upper chambers (atria) and two lower chambers (ventricles). Within the upper right chamber of the heart (right atrium) is a group of cells called the sinus node. The sinus node is the heart's natural pacemaker. It produces the signal that starts each heartbeat.Bradycardia occurs when these signals slow down or are blocked.Bradycardia, shown on the right, is a slower than typical heart rhythm that often starts in the area of the heart called the sinus node. A typical heart rhythm is shown in the image on the left.Bradycardia often starts in the area of the heart called the sinus node. In some people, sinus node problems cause alternating slow and fast heart rates (bradycardia-tachycardia syndrome).Bradycardia can also occur if the heart's electrical signals don't move correctly from the upper chambers (atria) to the lower chambers (ventricles). If this occurs, the condition is called heart block, or atrioventricular block.Heart blocks fall into three main groups.Bradycardia is often associated with damage to heart tissue from some type of heart disease. Anything that increases the risk of heart problems can increase the risk of bradycardia. Risk factors for heart disease include:Healthy-lifestyle changes or medical treatment may help lower the risk of heart disease.Possible complications of bradycardia can include:Bradycardia can be caused by certain medications, particularly if they are taken at high doses, so it's important to take all medications as directed. Although bradycardia is not typically preventable, health care providers recommend strategies to reduce the risk of developing heart disease. Take the following heart-healthy steps:If you already have heart disease, there are steps you can take to lower your risk of developing bradycardia or another heart rhythm disorder:Bradycardia care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart Rhythm Conditions support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.414 Replies Tue, May 28, 2024 93 Replies Thu, May 23, 2024 28 Replies Sat, May 04, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.First-degree heart block.Second-degree heart block.Third-degree (complete) heart block.Get regular exercise.Eat a healthy diet.Maintain a healthy weight.Keep blood pressure and cholesterol under control.Don't smoke.If you drink, do so in moderation.Manage stress.Go to scheduled checkups.Follow the plan.Report changes immediately.Advertising & Sponsorship