An aneurysm is a ballooning at a weak spot in an artery wall. An aneurysm's walls can be thin enough to rupture. The illustration shows an individual with an unruptured aneurysm. The inset shows what happens when the aneurysm ruptures.A brain aneurysm (AN-yoo-riz-um) — also known as a cerebral aneurysm or intracranial aneurysm — is a bulge or ballooning in a blood vessel in the brain. An aneurysm often looks like a berry hanging on a stem.Experts think brain aneurysms form and grow because blood flowing through the blood vessel puts pressure on a weak area of the vessel wall. This can increase the size of the brain aneurysm. If the brain aneurysm leaks or ruptures, it causes bleeding in the brain, known as a hemorrhagic stroke.Most often, a ruptured brain aneurysm occurs in the space between the brain and the thin tissues covering the brain. This type of hemorrhagic stroke is called a subarachnoid hemorrhage.Brain aneurysms are common. But most brain aneurysms aren't serious, especially if they're small. Most brain aneurysms don't rupture. They usually don't cause symptoms or cause health problems. In many cases, brain aneurysms are found during tests for other conditions.However, a ruptured aneurysm quickly becomes life-threatening and requires medical treatment right away.If a brain aneurysm hasn't ruptured, treatment may be appropriate in some cases. Treatment of an unruptured brain aneurysm may prevent a rupture in the future. Talk with your health care provider to make sure you understand the best options for your specific needs.A saccular aneurysm is known as a berry aneurysm. It's the most common type of brain aneurysm. It looks like a berry hanging from a vine. Another type of aneurysm is a fusiform aneurysm. It causes ballooning or bulging of the artery.Most brain aneurysms that haven't ruptured don't cause symptoms. This is especially true if they're small. Brain aneurysms may be found during imaging tests that are done for other conditions.However, a ruptured aneurysm is a very serious condition, typically causing a severe headache. And if an unruptured aneurysm presses against brain tissue or nerves, it may cause pain and other symptoms.A sudden, severe headache is the key symptom of a ruptured aneurysm. This headache is often described by people as the worst headache they've ever experienced.In addition to a severe headache, symptoms of a ruptured aneurysm can include:In some cases, an aneurysm may leak a slight amount of blood. When this happens, a more severe rupture often follows. Leaks may happen days or weeks before a rupture.Leaking brain aneurysm symptoms may include:An unruptured brain aneurysm may not have any symptoms, especially if it's small. However, a larger unruptured aneurysm may press on brain tissues and nerves.Symptoms of an unruptured brain aneurysm may include:Seek immediate medical attention if you develop a:If you're with someone who complains of a sudden, severe headache or who loses consciousness or has a seizure, call 911 or your local emergency number.Vivien Williams: An aneurysm is an abnormal bulge or ballooning in the wall of a blood vessel.Bernard Bendok, M.D., Neurosurgery, Mayo Clinic: A portion of these patients will go on to have a rupture. And the challenge with rupture is that it's unpredictable.Vivien Williams: Dr. Bernard Bendok says a ruptured aneurysm is a medical emergency that can cause life-threatening bleeding in the brain.Dr. Bendok: The typical presentation is somebody who has the worst headache of their life.Vivien Williams: Fast treatment is essential. It includes open surgery or less-invasive options, such as sealing the ruptured artery from within the blood vessel with metal coils and/or stents.Dr. Bendok says 1 to 2 percent of the population have aneurysms and only a small percentage of that group will experience a rupture. People who have a family history of aneurysms, have polycystic kidney disease, connective tissue disease, and people who smoke are at increased risk of rupture and should consider screening. If a rupture happens, fast treatment can save lives.For the Mayo Clinic News Network, I'm Vivien Williams.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesBrain aneurysms are caused by thinning artery walls. Aneurysms often form at forks or branches in arteries because those areas of the vessels are weaker. Although aneurysms can appear anywhere in the brain, they're most common in arteries at the base of the brain.Several factors can contribute to weakness in an artery wall. These factors may increase the risk of a brain aneurysm or aneurysm rupture.Some of these risk factors develop over time. But some conditions present at birth can increase the risk of developing a brain aneurysm.Risk factors include:Some types of aneurysms may occur after a head injury or from certain blood infections.There are some factors that make it more likely an aneurysm will rupture. They include:When a brain aneurysm ruptures, the bleeding usually lasts only a few seconds. However, the blood can cause direct damage to surrounding cells and can kill brain cells. It also increases pressure inside the skull.If the pressure becomes too high, it may disrupt the blood and oxygen supply to the brain. Loss of consciousness or even death may occur.Complications that can develop after the rupture of an aneurysm include:In many cases, brain aneurysms can't be prevented. But there are some changes you can make to lower your risk. They include quitting smoking if you smoke. Also work with your health care provider to lower your blood pressure if it's high. Don't drink large amounts of alcohol or use drugs such as cocaine.Brain aneurysm care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Saccular aneurysm, also known as a berry aneurysm.Fusiform aneurysm.Mycotic aneurysm.Seek immediate medical attentionVivien WilliamsBernard Bendok, M.D., Neurosurgery, Mayo ClinicVivien WilliamsDr. BendokVivien WilliamsOlder age.Being female.Cigarette smoking.High blood pressure. Drug use, particularly using cocaine.Heavy alcohol use.Inherited connective tissue disorders,Polycystic kidney disease.A narrow aorta, known as coarctation of the aorta.Brain arteriovenous malformation, known as AVM.A family history of brain aneurysm.Re-bleeding.Narrowed blood vessels in the brain.A buildup of fluid within the brain, known as hydrocephalus.Change in sodium level.Advertising & Sponsorship