Each breast contains 15 to 20 lobes of glandular tissue, arranged like the petals of a daisy. The lobes are further divided into smaller lobules that produce milk for breastfeeding. Small tubes, called ducts, conduct the milk to a reservoir that lies just beneath your nipple.Breast cancer is a kind of cancer that begins as a growth of cells in the breast tissue.After skin cancer, breast cancer is the most common cancer diagnosed in women in the United States. But breast cancer doesn't just happen in women. Everyone is born with some breast tissue, so anyone can get breast cancer.Breast cancer survival rates have been increasing. And the number of people dying of breast cancer is steadily going down. Much of this is due to the widespread support for breast cancer awareness and funding for research.Advances in breast cancer screening allow healthcare professionals to diagnose breast cancer earlier. Finding the cancer earlier makes it much more likely that the cancer can be cured. Even when breast cancer can't be cured, many treatments exist to extend life. New discoveries in breast cancer research are helping healthcare professionals choose the most effective treatment plans.Breast cancer care at Mayo ClinicBreast and nipple changes can be a sign of breast cancer. Make an appointment with a healthcare professional if you notice any changes.Signs and symptoms of breast cancer may include:If you find a lump or other change in your breast, make an appointment with a doctor or other healthcare professional. Don't wait for your next mammogram to see if the change you found is breast cancer. Report any changes in your breasts even if a recent mammogram showed there was no breast cancer.The exact cause of most breast cancers isn't known. Researchers have found things that increase the risk of breast cancer. These include hormones, lifestyle choices and things in the environment. But it's not clear why some people who don't have any factors get cancer, yet others with risk factors never do. It's likely that breast cancer happens through a complex interaction of your genetic makeup and the world around you.Healthcare professionals know that breast cancer starts when something changes the DNA inside cells in the breast tissue. A cell's DNA holds the instructions that tell a cell what to do. In healthy cells, the DNA gives instructions to grow and multiply at a set rate. The instructions tell the cells to die at a set time. In cancer cells, the DNA changes give different instructions. The changes tell the cancer cells to make many more cells quickly. Cancer cells can keep living when healthy cells would die. This causes too many cells.The cancer cells might form a mass called a tumor. The tumor can grow to invade and destroy healthy body tissue. In time, cancer cells can break away and spread to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads, it's called metastatic cancer.The DNA changes that lead to breast cancer most often happen in the cells that line the milk ducts. These ducts are tubes designed to carry milk to the nipple. Breast cancer that starts in the ducts is called invasive ductal carcinoma. Breast cancer also can start in cells in the milk glands. These glands, called lobules, are designed to make breast milk. Cancer that happens in the lobules is called invasive lobular carcinoma. Other cells in the breast can become cancer cells, though this isn't common.Factors that may increase the risk of breast cancer include:To perform a breast self-exam for breast awareness, use a methodical approach that ensures you cover your entire breast. For instance, imagine that your breasts are divided into equal wedges, like pieces of a pie, and sweep your fingers along each piece in toward your nipple.Making changes in your daily life may help lower your risk of breast cancer. Try to:Become familiar with your breasts through breast self-exam for breast awareness. You may choose to become familiar with your breasts by occasionally inspecting them during a breast self-exam for breast awareness. If there is a new change, a lump or something not typical in your breasts, report it to a healthcare professional right away.Breast awareness can't prevent breast cancer. But it may help you to better understand the look and feel of your breasts. This might make it more likely that you'll notice if something changes.Limit menopausal hormone therapy. Combination hormone therapy may increase the risk of breast cancer. Talk with a healthcare professional about the benefits and risks of hormone therapy.Some people have symptoms during menopause that cause discomfort. These people may decide that the risks of hormone therapy are acceptable in order to get relief. To reduce the risk of breast cancer, use the lowest dose of hormone therapy possible for the shortest amount of time.If you have a high risk of breast cancer, you might consider other options to lower the risk. You might have a high risk if you have a family history of breast cancer. Your risk also might be higher if you have a history of precancerous cells in the breast tissue. Talk about your risk with your healthcare team. Your team might have options for lowering your risk, such as:Preventive medicines. Using estrogen-blocking medicines can lower the risk of breast cancer in those who have a high risk. Options include medicines called selective estrogen receptor modulators and aromatase inhibitors. These medicines also are used as hormone therapy treatment for breast cancer.These medicines carry a risk of side effects. For this reason, they're only used in those who have a very high risk of breast cancer. Discuss the benefits and risks with your healthcare team.Breast cancer care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Breast Cancer support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.189 Replies Tue, Jun 25, 2024 83 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 14 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.A family history of breast cancer.A personal history of breast cancer.A personal history of breast conditions.Beginning your period at a younger age.Beginning menopause at an older age.Being female.Dense breast tissue.Drinking alcohol.Having your first child at an older age.Having never been pregnant.Increasing age.Inherited DNA changes that increase cancer risk.Menopausal hormone therapy.Obesity.Radiation exposure.Ask about breast cancer screening.Become familiar with your breasts through breast self-exam for breast awareness.Drink alcohol in moderation, if at all.Exercise most days of the week.Limit menopausal hormone therapy.Maintain a healthy weight.Preventive medicines.Preventive surgery.Advertising & Sponsorship