A broken rib occurs when one of the bones in the rib cage breaks or cracks.A broken rib is a common injury that occurs when one of the bones in the rib cage breaks or cracks. The most common causes are hard impacts from falls, car accidents or contact sports.Many broken ribs are simply cracked. Cracked ribs are painful. But they don't cause the problems that ribs that have broken into pieces can. The sharp edge of a broken bone can harm major blood vessels or lungs and other organs.Usually, broken ribs heal on their own in about six weeks. Pain control is important for being able to breathe deeply and avoid lung issues, such as pneumonia.The following can cause pain with a broken rib or make pain worse:See a health care provider if part of your rib area is tender after an accident or if you have trouble breathing or pain with deep breathing.Seek medical help right away if you feel pressure, fullness or a squeezing pain in the center of your chest that lasts for more than a few minutes or pain that goes beyond your chest to your shoulder or arm. These symptoms can mean a heart attack.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesDirect impact — such as from a car accident, a fall, child abuse or contact sports — is the most common cause of broken ribs. Ribs also can be broken by repeated impact from sports such as golf and rowing or from coughing hard and long.The following can increase the risk of breaking a rib:A broken rib can harm blood vessels and internal organs. Having more than one broken rib increases the risk.Complications depend on which ribs break. Possible complications include:To help keep a rib from breaking:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Osteoporosis.Sports.Cancer in a rib.Tear in the main artery of the body, known as the aorta.Tear in a lung.Ripped spleen, liver or kidneys.Protect from athletic injuries.Reduce the risk of falls in the house.Strengthen bones.Advertising & Sponsorship