Your arm is made up of three bones: the upper arm bone (humerus) and two forearm bones (the ulna and the radius). The term "broken arm" may refer to a fracture in any of these bones.A broken arm involves one or more of the three bones in your arm — the ulna, radius and humerus. One of the most common causes of a broken arm is falling onto an outstretched hand. If you think you or your child has broken an arm, seek prompt medical attention. It's important to treat a fracture as soon as possible for proper healing.Treatment depends on the site and severity of the injury. A simple break might be treated with a sling, ice and rest. However, the bone may require realignment (reduction) in the emergency room.A more complicated break might require surgery to realign the broken bone and to implant wires, plates, nails or screws to keep the bone in place during healing.A snap or cracking sound might be your first indication you've broken an arm. Signs and symptoms include:If you have enough pain in your arm that you can't use it normally, see a doctor right away. The same applies to your child. Delays in diagnosis and treatment of a broken arm, especially for children, who heal faster than adults do, can lead to poor healing.Common causes for a broken arm include:Certain medical conditions or physical activities can increase the risk of a broken arm.Any sport that involves physical contact or increases your risk of falling — including football, soccer, gymnastics, skiing and skateboarding — also increases the risk of a broken arm.Conditions that weaken bones, such as osteoporosis and bone tumors, increase your risk of a broken arm. This type of break is known as a pathological fracture.The prognosis for most arm fractures is very good if treated early. But complications can include:Although it's impossible to prevent an accident, these tips might offer some protection against bone breakage.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Falls.Sports injuries.Significant trauma.Child abuse.Uneven growth.Osteoarthritis.Stiffness.Bone infection.Nerve or blood vessel injury.Compartment syndrome.Eat for bone strength.Exercise for bone strength.Prevent falls.Use protective gear.Don't smoke.Advertising & Sponsorship