A broken leg (leg fracture) is a break or crack in one of the bones in your leg. Common causes include falls, motor vehicle accidents and sports injuries.Treatment of a broken leg depends on the location and severity of the injury. A severely broken leg may require metal pins and plates to hold the fragments together. Less severe breaks may be treated with a cast or splint. In all cases, prompt diagnosis and treatment are critical to complete healing.The thighbone (femur) is the strongest bone in the body. It is usually obvious when the thighbone is broken because it takes so much force to break. But a break in the shinbone (tibia) or in the bone that runs alongside the shinbone (fibula) may be less obvious.Signs and symptoms of a broken leg may include:Toddlers or young children who break a leg may start limping or simply stop walking, even if they can't explain why.If you or your child has any signs or symptoms of a broken leg, seek care right away. Delays in diagnosis and treatment can result in problems later, including poor healing.Seek emergency medical attention for any leg fracture from a high-impact trauma, such as a car or motorcycle accident. Fractures of the thighbone are severe, potentially life-threatening injuries that require emergency medical services to help protect the area from further damage and to provide safe transfer to a local hospital.A broken leg can be caused by:Stress fractures are often the result of repetitive stress to the leg bones from physical activities, such as:Contact sports, such as hockey and football, also may pose a risk of direct blows to the leg, which can result in a fracture.Stress fractures outside of sport situations are more common in people who have:Complications of a broken leg may include:A broken leg can't always be prevented. But these basic tips may reduce your risk:Broken leg care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Falls.Motor vehicle accidents.Sports injuries.Child abuse.Overuse.Knee or ankle pain.Bone infection (osteomyelitis).Poor or delayed healing.Nerve or blood vessel damage.Compartment syndrome.Arthritis.Unequal leg length.Build bone strength.Wear proper athletic shoes.Cross-train.Advertising & Sponsorship