Your wrist is made up of eight small bones (carpal bones) plus two long bones in your forearm — the radius and the ulna.The distal radius fracture is one of the most common fractures of the wrist. It usually occurs when people fall on an outstretched hand.A broken wrist is a break or crack in one or more of the bones of your wrist. The most common of these injuries occurs in the wrist when people try to catch themselves during a fall and land hard on an outstretched hand.You may be at higher risk of a broken wrist if you participate in sports like in-line skating or snowboarding, or if you have a condition in which bones become thinner and more fragile (osteoporosis).It's important to treat a broken wrist as soon as possible. Otherwise, the bones might not heal in proper alignment, which might affect your ability to do everyday activities, such as writing or buttoning a shirt. Early treatment will also help minimize pain and stiffness.A broken wrist might cause these signs and symptoms:If you think you might have a broken wrist, see a doctor immediately, especially if you have numbness, swelling or trouble moving your fingers. A delay in diagnosis and treatment can lead to poor healing, decreased range of motion and decreased grip strength.A broken wrist can be caused by:Participating in certain sports activities and having the bone-thinning disease osteoporosis can increase your chances of breaking a wrist.Contact sports and activities that increase your risk of falling can increase your risk of breaking bones in your wrist. Examples include:Complications of a broken wrist are rare, but they might include:It's impossible to prevent the unforeseen events that often cause a broken wrist. But these tips might offer some protection.To build strong bones:Most broken wrists occur when people fall forward onto an outstretched hand. To prevent this common injury:Wear wrist guards for high-risk activities, such as:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Falls.Sports injuries.Motor vehicle crashes.Ongoing stiffness, aching or disability.Osteoarthritis.Nerve or blood vessel damage.Advertising & Sponsorship