In your lungs, the main airways, called bronchi, branch off into smaller and smaller passageways. The smallest airways, called bronchioles, lead to tiny air sacs called alveoli.Bronchiolitis is a common lung infection in young children and infants. It causes swelling and irritation and a buildup of mucus in the small airways of the lung. These small airways are called bronchioles. Bronchiolitis is almost always caused by a virus.Bronchiolitis starts out with symptoms much like a common cold. But then it gets worse, causing coughing and a high-pitched whistling sound when breathing out called wheezing. Sometimes children have trouble breathing. Symptoms of bronchiolitis can last for 1 to 2 weeks but occasionally can last longer.Most children get better with care at home. A small number of children need a stay in the hospital.For the first few days, the symptoms of bronchiolitis are much like a cold:Later, your child may have a week or more of working harder than usual to breathe, which may include wheezing.Many infants with bronchiolitis also have an ear infection called otitis media.If symptoms become serious, call your child's health care provider. This is especially important if your child is younger than 12 weeks old or has other risk factors for bronchiolitis — for example, being born too early, also called premature, or having a heart condition.Get medical attention right away if your child has any of these symptoms:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesBronchiolitis happens when a virus infects the bronchioles, which are the smallest airways in the lungs. The infection makes the bronchioles swollen and irritated. Mucus collects in these airways, which makes it difficult for air to flow freely in and out of the lungs.Bronchiolitis is usually caused by the respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). RSV is a common virus that infects just about every child by 2 years of age. Outbreaks of RSV infection often happen during the colder months of the year in some locations or the rainy season in others. A person can get it more than once. Bronchiolitis also can be caused by other viruses, including those that cause the flu or the common cold.The viruses that cause bronchiolitis are easily spread. You can get them through droplets in the air when someone who is sick coughs, sneezes or talks. You also can get them by touching shared items — such as dishes, doorknobs, towels or toys — and then touching your eyes, nose or mouth.Bronchiolitis usually affects children under the age of 2 years. Infants younger than 3 months have the highest risk of getting bronchiolitis because their lungs and their ability to fight infections aren't yet fully developed. Rarely, adults can get bronchiolitis.Other factors that increase the risk of bronchiolitis in infants and young children include:Complications of severe bronchiolitis may include:If any of these happen, your child may need to be in the hospital. Severe respiratory failure may require that a tube be guided into the windpipe. This helps your child breathe until the infection improves.Because the viruses that cause bronchiolitis spread from person to person, one of the best ways to prevent infection is to wash your hands often. This is especially important before touching your baby when you have a cold, flu or other illness that can be spread. If you have any of these illnesses, wear a face mask.If your child has bronchiolitis, keep your child at home until the illness is past to avoid spreading it to others.To help prevent infection:In the U.S., respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is the most common cause of bronchiolitis and pneumonia in children who are less than a year old. Two options for immunization can help prevent young infants from getting severe RSV. Both are recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics, the American Academy of Family Physicians, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, and others.You and your healthcare professional should discuss which option is best to protect your child:In rare situations, when nirsevimab is not available or a child is not eligible for it, another antibody product called palivizumab may be given. But palivizumab requires monthly shots given during the RSV season, while nirsevimab is only one shot. Palivizumab is not recommended for healthy children or adults.Other viruses can cause bronchiolitis too. These include COVID-19 and influenza or flu. Getting seasonal COVID-19 and flu shots every year is recommended for everyone older than 6 months.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Limit contact with people who have a fever or cold.Clean and disinfect surfaces.Wash hands often.Cover coughs and sneezes.Use your own drinking glass.Breastfeed, when possible.Antibody product called nirsevimab (Beyfortus).Vaccine for pregnant people.Advertising & Sponsorship