Bundle branch block is a condition in which there's a delay or blockage along the pathway that electrical impulses travel to make the heart beat. It sometimes makes it harder for the heart to pump blood to the rest of the body.The delay or blockage can occur on the pathway that sends electrical impulses either to the left or the right side of the bottom chambers (ventricles) of the heart.Bundle branch block might not need treatment. When it does, treatment involves managing the underlying health condition, such as heart disease, that caused bundle branch block. Electrical impulses that cause your heart to beat (contract) start in the heart's upper right chamber (right atrium) and travel to the lower chambers (ventricles). In bundle branch block, the pathway these impulses follow is delayed or blocked. The pathway includes two branches the left and the right bundles. If one bundle is damaged, the ventricles rely on the other bundle to receive and respond to signals from the right atrium. If both bundles are blocked, the heart may beat very slowly, which can require a pacemaker. In most people, bundle branch block doesn't cause symptoms. Some people with the condition don't know they have bundle branch block.Rarely, symptoms of bundle branch block may include fainting (syncope) or feeling as if you're going to faint (presyncope).If you've fainted, see a health care provider to rule out serious causes.If you have heart disease or have been diagnosed with bundle branch block, ask your provider how often you should have follow-up visits.Electrical impulses within the heart muscle cause it to beat (contract). These impulses travel along a pathway, including two branches called the right and the left bundles. If one or both of these branch bundles are damaged — due to a heart attack, for example — the electrical impulses can become blocked. As a result, the heart beats irregularly.The cause for bundle branch blocks can differ depending on whether the left or the right bundle branch is affected. Sometimes, there is no known cause.Causes can include:Risk factors for bundle branch block include:If both the right and the left bundles are blocked, the main complication is a complete blockage of the electric signaling from the upper to the lower chambers of the heart. The lack of signaling can slow the heart rate. A slowed heart rate may lead to fainting, irregular heart rhythms and other serious complications.Because bundle branch block affects the electrical activity of the heart, it can sometimes complicate the accurate diagnosis of other heart conditions, especially heart attacks. It may lead to delays in proper management of those heart conditions.Jun 11, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.