A bunion is a bony bump that forms on the joint at the base of your big toe. It occurs when some of the bones in the front part of your foot move out of place. This causes the tip of your big toe to get pulled toward the smaller toes and forces the joint at the base of your big toe to stick out. The skin over the bunion might be red and sore.Wearing tight, narrow shoes might cause bunions or make them worse. Bunions can also develop as a result of the shape of your foot, a foot deformity or a medical condition, such as arthritis.Smaller bunions (bunionettes) can develop on the joint of your little toe. When you have a bunion, the tip of your big toe shifts towards the smaller toes, crowding them. This also forces the joint at the base of your big toe to stick out. Smaller bunions (bunionettes) can develop on the joint at the base of your little toe. The signs and symptoms of a bunion include:Although bunions often require no medical treatment, see your doctor or a doctor who specializes in treating foot disorders (podiatrist or orthopedic foot specialist) if you have:There are many theories about how bunions develop, but the exact cause is unknown. Factors likely include:Experts disagree on whether tight, high-heeled or too-narrow shoes cause bunions or whether footwear simply contributes to the development of bunions.Bunions might be associated with certain types of arthritis, particularly inflammatory types, such as rheumatoid arthritis.These factors might increase your risk of bunions:Possible complications of bunions include:To help prevent bunions, choose shoes carefully. They should have a wide toe box — no pointy toes — and there should be space between the tip of your longest toe and the end of the shoe.Your shoes should conform to the shape of your feet without squeezing or pressing any part of your foot.Nov 06, 2021CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.