Bursae are small fluid-filled sacs that reduce friction between moving parts in your body's joints. Shoulder bursitis is inflammation or irritation of a bursa (shown in blue) in your shoulder.Bursae are small fluid-filled sacs that reduce friction between moving parts in your body's joints. Elbow bursitis is inflammation or irritation of the bursa (shown in blue) in your elbow.Bursae are small fluid-filled sacs that reduce friction between moving parts in your body's joints. Hip bursitis is inflammation or irritation of one or more of the bursae (shown in blue) in your hip.Bursae are small fluid-filled sacs, shown in blue. They lessen friction between moving parts in the body's joints. Knee bursitis is swelling, also called inflammation, of one or more of the bursae in the knee.Bursitis (bur-SY-tis) is a painful condition that affects the small, fluid-filled sacs — called bursae (bur-SEE) — that cushion the bones, tendons and muscles near your joints. Bursitis occurs when bursae become inflamed.The most common locations for bursitis are in the shoulder, elbow and hip. But you can also have bursitis by your knee, heel and the base of your big toe. Bursitis often occurs near joints that perform frequent repetitive motion.Treatment typically involves resting the affected joint and protecting it from further trauma. In most cases, bursitis pain goes away within a few weeks with proper treatment, but recurrent flare-ups of bursitis are common.If you have bursitis, the affected joint might:Consult your doctor if you have:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe most common causes of bursitis are repetitive motions or positions that put pressure on the bursae around a joint. Examples include:Other causes include injury or trauma to the affected area, inflammatory arthritis such as rheumatoid arthritis, gout and infection.Anyone can develop bursitis, but certain factors can increase your risk:While not all types of bursitis can be prevented, you can reduce your risk and the severity of flare-ups by changing the way you do certain tasks. Examples include:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Age.Occupations or hobbies.Other medical conditions.Using kneeling pads.Lifting properly.Wheeling heavy loads.Taking frequent breaks.Maintaining a healthy weight.Exercising.Warming up and stretchingAdvertising & Sponsorship