Cancer refers to any one of a large number of diseases characterized by the development of abnormal cells that divide uncontrollably and have the ability to infiltrate and destroy normal body tissue. Cancer often has the ability to spread throughout your body.Cancer is the second-leading cause of death in the world. But survival rates are improving for many types of cancer, thanks to improvements in cancer screening, treatment and prevention.Signs and symptoms caused by cancer will vary depending on what part of the body is affected.Some general signs and symptoms associated with, but not specific to, cancer, include:Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs or symptoms that concern you.If you don't have any signs or symptoms, but are worried about your risk of cancer, discuss your concerns with your doctor. Ask about which cancer screening tests and procedures are appropriate for you.Cancer is caused by changes (mutations) to the DNA within cells. The DNA inside a cell is packaged into a large number of individual genes, each of which contains a set of instructions telling the cell what functions to perform, as well as how to grow and divide. Errors in the instructions can cause the cell to stop its normal function and may allow a cell to become cancerous.A gene mutation can instruct a healthy cell to:These mutations are the most common ones found in cancer. But many other gene mutations can contribute to causing cancer.Gene mutations can occur for several reasons, for instance:Gene mutations occur frequently during normal cell growth. However, cells contain a mechanism that recognizes when a mistake occurs and repairs the mistake. Occasionally, a mistake is missed. This could cause a cell to become cancerous.The gene mutations you're born with and those that you acquire throughout your life work together to cause cancer.For instance, if you've inherited a genetic mutation that predisposes you to cancer, that doesn't mean you're certain to get cancer. Instead, you may need one or more other gene mutations to cause cancer. Your inherited gene mutation could make you more likely than other people to develop cancer when exposed to a certain cancer-causing substance.It's not clear just how many mutations must accumulate for cancer to form. It's likely that this varies among cancer types.While doctors have an idea of what may increase your risk of cancer, the majority of cancers occur in people who don't have any known risk factors. Factors known to increase your risk of cancer include:Cancer can take decades to develop. That's why most people diagnosed with cancer are 65 or older. While it's more common in older adults, cancer isn't exclusively an adult disease — cancer can be diagnosed at any age.Certain lifestyle choices are known to increase your risk of cancer. Smoking, drinking more than one drink a day for women and up to two drinks a day for men, excessive exposure to the sun or frequent blistering sunburns, being obese, and having unsafe sex can contribute to cancer.You can change these habits to lower your risk of cancer — though some habits are easier to change than others.Only a small portion of cancers are due to an inherited condition. If cancer is common in your family, it's possible that mutations are being passed from one generation to the next. You might be a candidate for genetic testing to see whether you have inherited mutations that might increase your risk of certain cancers. Keep in mind that having an inherited genetic mutation doesn't necessarily mean you'll get cancer.Some chronic health conditions, such as ulcerative colitis, can markedly increase your risk of developing certain cancers. Talk to your doctor about your risk.The environment around you may contain harmful chemicals that can increase your risk of cancer. Even if you don't smoke, you might inhale secondhand smoke if you go where people are smoking or if you live with someone who smokes. Chemicals in your home or workplace, such as asbestos and benzene, also are associated with an increased risk of cancer.Cancer and its treatment can cause several complications, including:Doctors have identified several ways to reduce your risk of cancer, such as:Cancer care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Cancer support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.120 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 57 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 61 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Allow rapid growth.Fail to stop uncontrolled cell growth.Make mistakes when repairing DNA errors.Gene mutations you're born with.Gene mutations that occur after birth.Pain.Fatigue.Difficulty breathing.Nausea.Diarrhea or constipation.Weight loss.Chemical changes in your body.Brain and nervous system problems.Unusual immune system reactions to cancer.Cancer that spreads.Cancer that returns.Stop smoking.Avoid excessive sun exposure.Eat a healthy diet.Exercise most days of the week.Maintain a healthy weight.Drink alcohol in moderation, if you choose to drink.Schedule cancer screening exams.Ask your doctor about immunizations.Advertising & Sponsorship