Carbon monoxide poisoning occurs when carbon monoxide builds up in the blood. When too much carbon monoxide is in the air, the body replaces the oxygen in the red blood cells with carbon monoxide. This can lead to serious tissue damage, or even death.Carbon monoxide is gas that has no odor, taste or color. Burning fuels, including gas, wood, propane or charcoal, make carbon monoxide. Appliances and engines that aren't well vented can cause the gas to build up to dangerous levels. A tightly enclosed space makes the buildup worse.Anyone exposed to carbon monoxide needs to get into fresh air and seek medical care right away. Call emergency medical services (EMS) or dial 911 right away for someone who's in a coma or can't respond.Carbon monoxide poisoning affects the brain and heart the most. Exposure over time might lead to symptoms that can be mistaken for the flu without the fever. Clearer symptoms of carbon monoxide poisoning can include:Symptoms related to the nervous system and brain can come on after recovery from carbon monoxide poisoning. The risk of these is higher in people who lost consciousness from the carbon monoxide and older people. Symptoms might include:Carbon monoxide poisoning can be especially dangerous for people who are asleep, drugged or drunk. Carbon monoxide can cause brain damage or death before anyone realizes there's a problem.For possible carbon monoxide poisoning, get into fresh air and seek medical care right away.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesMany fuel-burning products and engines make carbon monoxide. Most often the amount of carbon monoxide from these sources isn't cause for worry in areas with good air flow. But if they're used in a partly closed or closed space, the carbon monoxide level can be a danger. Examples are using a charcoal grill indoors or a running car inside a garage.Breathing the fumes causes carbon monoxide to replace oxygen in the blood. This prevents oxygen from getting to tissues and organs.Breathing in smoke during a fire also can cause carbon monoxide poisoning. And smoking through a water pipe, called a hookah, has been linked to increasing numbers of younger people getting carbon monoxide poisoning.Breathing in carbon monoxide can be especially dangerous for:Damage from carbon monoxide depends on how much is breathed in and for how long. Carbon monoxide poisoning can cause:To help prevent carbon monoxide poisoning:Have carbon monoxide detectors in the home. Put them near each sleeping area on every level of the house. Check the batteries at least twice a year at the same time as checking the smoke detector batteries.If the alarm sounds, believe it! Leave the house and call 911 or the fire department. Carbon monoxide detectors are also made for motor homes and boats.Make sure there's space around fuel-burning appliances and engines. These include all gas appliances, space heaters and wood-burning stoves. Make sure they're vented properly.Have professionals set up all gas, oil or coal-burning appliances. Have a qualified service-provider service them yearly.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Unborn babies.Infants and children.Older adults.Have carbon monoxide detectors in the home.Open the garage door before starting the car.Use gas appliances only as intended.Make sure there's space around fuel-burning appliances and engines.Keep fireplaces in good condition.Keep vents and chimneys unblocked during remodeling.Do repairs before returning to where the poisoning occurred.Advertising & Sponsorship