Carcinoma of unknown primary is a diagnosis given when doctors aren't able to locate where a cancer began.Most often, cancer is diagnosed when doctors discover the spot where the cancer began (primary tumor). If the cancer has spread (metastasized), those sites might be discovered, too.In carcinoma of unknown primary, also known as occult primary cancer, doctors find the cancer cells that spread in the body, but they can't find the primary tumor.Doctors consider the location of the primary tumor when choosing the most appropriate treatments. So if carcinoma of unknown primary is found, doctors work to try to identify the primary tumor site. Your doctor might consider your risk factors, symptoms, and results from exams, imaging tests and pathology tests when trying to determine where your cancer began.Signs and symptoms of carcinoma of unknown primary depend on what part of the body is involved. In general, they might include:In general, cancer forms when cells develop changes (mutations) in their DNA. The DNA contains instructions that tell cells what to do. Certain mutations can cause a cell to multiply uncontrollably and to continue living when normal cells would die. When this happens, the abnormal cells accumulate and form a tumor. The tumor cells can break away and spread (metastasize) to other parts of the body.In carcinoma of unknown primary, the cancer cells that spread to other parts of the body are found. But the original tumor isn't found.This can happen if:The risk of carcinoma of unknown primary might be related to:Carcinoma of unknown primary care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Cancer support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.190 Replies Tue, Jun 25, 2024 121 Replies Tue, Jun 25, 2024 57 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Older age.Family history of cancer.Advertising & Sponsorship