The carotid arteries are a pair of blood vessels. There's one on each side of the neck. The carotid arteries deliver blood to the brain and head.Carotid artery disease occurs when fatty deposits, called plaques, clog the blood vessels that deliver blood to the brain and head (carotid arteries). The clog increases the risk of stroke. Stroke is a medical emergency that occurs when the brain loses all or much of its blood supply.During a stroke, the brain doesn't get oxygen and brain cells begin to die within minutes. Stroke is a leading cause of death and disability in the U.S.Carotid artery disease often develops slowly. The first sign of the condition might be a stroke or transient ischemic attack (TIA). A TIA is a temporary shortage of blood flow to the brain.Treatment of carotid artery disease usually involves lifestyle changes, medicines and sometimes surgery.In its early stages, carotid artery disease often doesn't have symptoms. The condition might not be obvious until it's serious enough to deprive the brain of blood, causing a stroke or TIA.Symptoms of a stroke or TIA include:Seek emergency care for any symptoms of a stroke. Even if they last only a short while and then you feel OK, see a health care provider right away. You might have had a TIA. A TIA puts you at risk of a stroke.Talk to your health care provider if you have risk factors for carotid artery disease even if you don't have symptoms. Managing the risk factors might protect you from a stroke. Seeing a provider early increases your chances of finding carotid artery disease and getting treatment before a stroke occurs.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesA buildup of fatty deposits, known as plaques, in the arteries that send blood to the brain cause carotid artery disease. Plaques are clumps that include cholesterol, fat and blood cells that form in the artery. This process is called atherosclerosis.Carotid arteries that are clogged with plaques narrow. A clog in carotid arteries makes it hard for oxygen and nutrients to reach the brain.Factors that increase the risk of carotid artery disease include:An ischemic stroke occurs when a blood clot, known as a thrombus, blocks or plugs an artery leading to the brain. A blood clot often forms in arteries damaged by a buildup of plaques, known as atherosclerosis. It can occur in the carotid artery of the neck as well as other arteries.Carotid artery disease causes about 10% to 15% of strokes. A stroke is a medical emergency that can cause brain damage, muscle weakness and possibly death.Carotid artery disease can lead to stroke through:These steps can help prevent carotid artery disease or keep it from getting worse:Carotid artery disease care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Sudden numbness or weaknessSudden trouble speakingSudden trouble seeingSudden dizzinessSudden, severe headacheHigh blood pressure.Tobacco use.Diabetes.High blood-fat levels.Family history.Age.Obesity.Sleep apnea.Lack of exercise.Reduced blood flow.Ruptured plaques.Blood clot blockage.Don't smoke.Maintain a healthy weight.Eat a healthy diet.Limit salt.Exercise regularly.Limit or avoid alcohol.Control illnesses.Advertising & Sponsorship