Carpal tunnel syndrome is one of the most common hand conditions. It is caused by pressure on the median nerve in the carpal tunnel of the wrist. The carpal tunnel is a narrow passageway surrounded by bones and ligaments on the palm side of the hand. When the median nerve is compressed, symptoms can include numbness, tingling and weakness in the thumb and fingers.Wrist anatomy, health conditions and possibly repetitive hand motions can contribute to carpal tunnel syndrome.Proper treatment usually relieves the tingling and numbness and restores hand function.Symptoms of carpal tunnel syndrome usually start gradually and include:Tingling and numbness. Tingling and numbness may occur in the fingers or hand. Usually the thumb, index, middle and ring fingers are affected, but not the little finger. You might have a feeling like an electric shock in these fingers. These symptoms often occur while holding a steering wheel, phone or newspaper, or they may wake you from sleep.The sensation also can travel from the wrist up the arm.Many people "shake out" their hands to try to relieve their symptoms. The numb feeling may become constant over time.See your healthcare professional if you have symptoms of carpal tunnel syndrome that interfere with your usual activities and sleep patterns. Permanent nerve and muscle damage can occur without treatment.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesCarpal tunnel syndrome is caused by pressure on the median nerve.The median nerve runs from the forearm through a passageway in the wrist to the hand, known as the carpal tunnel. The median nerve provides sensation to the palm side of the thumb and all of the fingers except the little finger. This nerve also provides signals to move the muscles around the base of the thumb. This movement is known as motor function.Anything that squeezes or irritates the median nerve in the carpal tunnel space may lead to carpal tunnel syndrome. A wrist fracture can narrow the carpal tunnel and irritate the nerve. This also may occur due to swelling and inflammation caused by rheumatoid arthritis or other diseases.Many times, there is no single cause of carpal tunnel syndrome. Or the cause may not be known. It may be that a combination of risk factors contributes to the development of the condition.Several factors have been linked with carpal tunnel syndrome. Although they may not directly cause carpal tunnel syndrome, they may increase the risk of irritation or damage to the median nerve. These include:Anatomical factors. A wrist fracture or dislocation can alter the space within the carpal tunnel. Arthritis that causes changes to the small bones in the wrist can affect the carpal tunnel. These changes can put pressure on the median nerve.People who have smaller carpal tunnels may be more likely to have carpal tunnel syndrome.Sex assigned at birth. Carpal tunnel syndrome is generally more common in women. This may be because the carpal tunnel area is relatively smaller in women than in men. Or it may be due to the effect of hormones on the lining of the tendons in the carpal tunnel.Women who have carpal tunnel syndrome also may have smaller carpal tunnels than do women who don't have the condition.Workplace factors. Working with vibrating tools or on an assembly line that requires repeated movements that flex the wrist may create pressure on the median nerve. Such work also may worsen existing nerve damage. Pressure on the nerve can be worse if the work is done in a cold environment.However, the scientific evidence is conflicting and these factors haven't been established as direct causes of carpal tunnel syndrome.Several studies have evaluated whether there is a link between computer use and carpal tunnel syndrome. Some evidence suggests that mouse use, but not the use of a keyboard, may be related to carpal tunnel syndrome. There has not been enough quality and consistent evidence to support extensive computer use as a risk factor for carpal tunnel syndrome. However, computer use may cause a different form of hand pain.Lessen stress on the hands and wrists to help prevent carpal tunnel syndrome. While using a keyboard, do not bend the wrists all the way up or down.There are no proven strategies to prevent carpal tunnel syndrome, but you can lessen stress on the hands and wrists with these methods:Carpal tunnel syndrome care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Tingling and numbness.Weakness.Anatomical factors.Sex assigned at birth.Nerve-damaging conditions.Inflammatory conditions.Medicines.Obesity.Body fluid changes.Other medical conditions.Workplace factors.Reduce your force and relax your grip.Take short, frequent breaks.Watch your form.Improve your posture.Change your computer mouse.Keep your hands warm.Advertising & Sponsorship