Castleman disease is a rare disorder that involves an overgrowth of cells in your body's lymph nodes. The most common form of the disorder affects a single lymph node, usually in the chest or abdomen. This form is called unicentric Castleman disease.Multicentric Castleman disease, or MCD, affects multiple lymph nodes throughout the body. There are 3 types:Treatment and outlook vary, depending on the type of Castleman disease you have. The type that affects only one lymph node, unicentric Castleman disease, can usually be successfully treated with surgery.Many people with unicentric Castleman disease don't notice any signs or symptoms. The enlarged lymph node may be found during a physical exam or an imaging test for some unrelated problem.Some people with unicentric Castleman disease might have signs and symptoms that are more commonly seen in multicentric Castleman disease, which may include:The enlarged lymph nodes associated with multicentric Castleman disease are most commonly found in the neck, collarbone, underarm and groin areas.If you notice an enlarged lymph node on the side of your neck or in your underarm, collarbone or groin area, talk to your health care provider. Also call your care team if you have a persistent feeling of fullness in your chest or abdomen, fever, fatigue, or unexplained weight loss.It's not clear what causes Castleman disease. However, infection by a virus called human herpes virus 8, or HHV-8, is associated with the HHV-8 version of multicentric Castleman disease.Studies have found that HHV-8 is present in nearly all HIV-positive people who have Castleman disease and in fewer than of half of HIV-negative people with Castleman disease.Castleman disease can affect people of any age. But the average age of people diagnosed with unicentric Castleman disease is 35. Most people with the multicentric form are in their 50s and 60s. The multicentric form is also slightly more common in men than in women.The risk of developing multicentric Castleman disease is higher in people who are infected with HIV.People with unicentric Castleman disease usually do well once the affected lymph node is removed. Multicentric Castleman disease may lead to life-threatening infections or organ failure. People who also haveHIV/AIDS generally have the worst outcomes.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.HHV-8-associated MCD.Idiopathic MCD.POEMS-associated MCD.Advertising & Sponsorship