A cataract occurs when the lens of your eye becomes cloudy. Eventually, a cataract can become like the one shown in this person's right eye.Clear vision, like on the left, becomes blurred as a cataract forms, like on the right.A cataract is a clouding of the lens of the eye, which is typically clear. For people who have cataracts, seeing through cloudy lenses is like looking through a frosty or fogged-up window. Clouded vision caused by cataracts can make it more difficult to read, drive a car at night or see the expression on a friend's face.Most cataracts develop slowly and don't disturb eyesight early on. But with time, cataracts will eventually affect vision.At first, stronger lighting and eyeglasses can help deal with cataracts. But if impaired vision affects usual activities, cataract surgery might be needed. Fortunately, cataract surgery is generally a safe, effective procedure.Symptoms of cataracts include:At first, the cloudiness in your vision caused by a cataract may affect only a small part of the eye's lens. You may not notice any vision loss. As the cataract grows larger, it clouds more of your lens. More clouding changes the light passing through the lens. This may lead to symptoms you notice more.Make an appointment for an eye exam if you notice any changes in your vision. If you develop sudden vision changes, such as double vision or flashes of light, sudden eye pain, or a sudden headache, see a member of your health care team right away.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesMost cataracts develop when aging or injury changes the tissue that makes up the eye's lens. Proteins and fibers in the lens begin to break down. This causes vision to become hazy or cloudy.Some disorders passed down from parents that cause other health problems can increase your risk of cataracts. Cataracts also can be caused by other eye conditions, past eye surgery or medical conditions such as diabetes. Long-term use of steroid medicines also may cause cataracts to develop.A cataract is a cloudy lens. The lens sits behind the colored part of your eye, called the iris. The lens focuses light that passes into your eye. This produces clear, sharp images on the back part of the eye, called the retina.As you age, the lenses in your eyes become less flexible, less clear and thicker. Aging and some medical conditions can cause proteins and fibers within the lenses to break down and clump together. This is what causes the clouding in the lenses.As the cataract grows, the clouding becomes worse. A cataract scatters and blocks the light as it passes through the lens. This prevents a sharply defined image from reaching your retina. As a result, your vision becomes blurred.Cataracts usually happen in both eyes, but not always at the same rate. The cataract in one eye may be worse than the other. This causes a difference in vision between eyes.Cataract types include:Cataracts you're born with, called congenital cataracts. Some people are born with cataracts or develop them during childhood. These cataracts may be passed down from parents. They also may be associated with an infection or trauma while in the womb.These cataracts also may be due to certain conditions. These may include myotonic dystrophy, galactosemia, neurofibromatosis type 2 or rubella. Congenital cataracts don't always affect vision. If they do, they're usually removed soon after they're found.Factors that increase your risk of cataracts include:No studies have proved how to prevent or slow the growth of cataracts. But health care professionals think several strategies may be helpful, including:Choose a healthy diet that includes plenty of fruits and vegetables. Adding fruits and vegetables to your diet ensures that you're getting many vitamins and nutrients. Fruits and vegetables have antioxidants. Antioxidants help maintain the health of your eyes.Studies haven't proved that antioxidants in pill form can prevent cataracts. But a large population study recently showed that a healthy diet rich in vitamins and minerals reduced the risk of developing cataracts. Fruits and vegetables have many proven health benefits. Eating them is a safe way to get enough minerals and vitamins in your diet.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Cataracts affecting the center of the lens, called nuclear cataracts.Cataracts that affect the edges of the lens, called cortical cataracts.Cataracts that affect the back of the lens, called posterior subcapsular cataracts.Cataracts you're born with, called congenital cataracts.Regular eye exams.Do not smoke.Manage other health problems.Choose a healthy diet that includes plenty of fruits and vegetables.Wear sunglasses.Reduce alcohol use.Advertising & Sponsorship