Cavities are decayed areas of your teeth that become tiny openings or holes. The three types of cavities are shown here. Smooth surface cavities occur on the smooth sides of your teeth. Root cavities occur on the surface over the roots. Pit and fissure cavities occur on the chewing surface of your teeth. Not cleaning your teeth well, snacking a lot and sipping sugary drinks are the main causes of cavities.Cavities are areas in the hard surface of your teeth that are damaged. These areas of tooth decay become tiny openings or holes that can lead to a serious toothache, infection and tooth loss. There are several causes of cavities, including bacteria in your mouth, snacking a lot, sipping sugary drinks and not cleaning your teeth well.Cavities and tooth decay are among the world's most common health problems. They're especially common in children, teenagers and older adults. But anyone who has teeth can get cavities, including babies.If cavities aren't treated, they get larger and affect deeper layers of your teeth. Regular dental visits and good brushing and flossing habits are the best ways to protect your teeth from cavities.The symptoms of cavities vary, depending on how many you have and where they're located. When a cavity is just beginning, you may not have any symptoms. As the decay gets larger, it may cause symptoms such as:You may not be aware that a cavity is forming. That's why it's important to have regular dental checkups and cleanings, even when your mouth feels fine. But if you have a toothache or mouth pain, see your dentist as soon as possible.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesTooth decay causes cavities. This is a process that occurs over time.Here's how tooth decay happens:Anyone who has teeth can get cavities, but these factors raise the risk:Cavities and tooth decay are so common that you may not take them seriously. And you may think that it doesn't matter if children get cavities in their baby teeth. But cavities and tooth decay can have serious and lasting complications, even for children who don't have their permanent teeth yet.Complications of cavities may include:When cavities and decay become serious, you may have:Good oral and dental hygiene can help keep you from getting cavities. Here are some tips to help prevent cavities. Ask your dentist which tips are best for you.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Plaque forms.Plaque attacks.Damage continues.Tooth location.Certain foods and drinks.Snacking or sipping a lot.Bedtime baby feeding.Not brushing your teeth well.Not getting enough fluoride.Younger or older age.Dry mouth.Worn fillings or dental devices.Heartburn.Eating disorders.Brush with fluoride toothpaste after eating or drinking.Rinse your mouth.Visit your dentist regularly.Consider dental sealants.Drink some tap water.Avoid snacking and sipping a lot.Eat tooth-healthy foods.Consider fluoride treatments.Ask about antiseptic and disinfecting treatments.Combined treatments.Advertising & Sponsorship