Central sleep apnea is a disorder in which breathing repeatedly stops and starts during sleep.Central sleep apnea occurs because the brain doesn't send proper signals to the muscles that control breathing. This condition is different from obstructive sleep apnea, in which breathing stops because the throat muscles relax and block the airway. Central sleep apnea is less common than obstructive sleep apnea.Central sleep apnea can result from other conditions, such as heart failure and stroke. Another possible cause is sleeping at a high altitude.Treatments for central sleep apnea might involve managing existing conditions, using a device to assist breathing or using supplemental oxygen.Common symptoms of central sleep apnea include:Although snoring suggests some degree of a blocked airway, snoring also can occur in people with central sleep apnea. However, snoring may not be as prominent with central sleep apnea as it is with obstructive sleep apnea.Consult a medical professional if you have — or if your partner notices — any symptoms of central sleep apnea, particularly:Ask a member of your health care team about any sleep problem that leaves you regularly fatigued, sleepy and irritable. Excessive daytime drowsiness can be due to other disorders, so it's important to get an accurate diagnosis. Sleepiness during the day may be caused by obstructive sleep apnea, by not allowing yourself time to get enough sleep at night or by sudden attacks of sleep, known as narcolepsy.Central sleep apnea occurs when your brain doesn't transmit signals to your breathing muscles.The brainstem links the brain to the spinal cord. It controls many functions, including heart rate and breathing. Central sleep apnea can be caused by a number of conditions that affect the ability of the brainstem to control breathing.The cause varies with the type of central sleep apnea you have. Types include:Cheyne-Stokes breathing. This type of central sleep apnea is most commonly associated with congestive heart failure or stroke.During Cheyne-Stokes breathing, breathing effort and airflow gradually rise and then lessen. During the weakest breathing effort, a total lack of airflow can occur.Certain factors put you at increased risk of central sleep apnea:CPAP. Some people with obstructive sleep apnea develop central sleep apnea while using continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP). This condition is known as treatment-emergent central sleep apnea. It is a combination of obstructive and central sleep apneas.For some people, complex sleep apnea goes away with continued use of their CPAP device. Other people may be treated with a different kind of positive airway pressure therapy.Central sleep apnea is a serious medical condition. Some complications include:Fatigue. The repeated awakenings associated with sleep apnea make restorative sleep impossible. People with central sleep apnea often have severe fatigue, daytime drowsiness and irritability.You might have trouble focusing. You also may find yourself falling asleep at work, while watching television or even while driving.Cardiovascular problems. Sudden drops in blood oxygen levels that occur during central sleep apnea can affect heart health.If you have heart disease, repeated episodes of low blood oxygen increase the risk of irregular heart rhythms.Central sleep apnea care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Cheyne-Stokes breathing.Drug-induced apnea.High-altitude periodic breathing.Treatment-emergent central sleep apnea.Medical condition-induced central sleep apnea.Primary central sleep apnea, also known as idiopathic sleep apnea.Sex.Age.Heart disorders.Stroke, brain tumor or a structural problem with the brainstem.High altitude.Opioid use.CPAP.Fatigue.Cardiovascular problems.Advertising & Sponsorship