Chemo brain is a common term used by cancer survivors to describe thinking and memory problems that can occur during and after cancer treatment. Chemo brain can also be called chemo fog, cancer-related cognitive impairment or cognitive dysfunction.Though chemo brain is a widely used term, the causes of concentration and memory problems aren't well-understood. It's likely that there are multiple causes.No matter the cause, chemo brain can be a frustrating and debilitating side effect of cancer and its treatment. Researchers are working to understand the memory changes that people with cancer experience.Signs and symptoms of chemo brain may include the following:If you experience troubling memory or thinking problems, make an appointment with your doctor. Keep a journal of your signs and symptoms so that your doctor can better understand how your memory problems are affecting your everyday life.There are many possible factors that might contribute to the signs and symptoms of memory problems in cancer survivors.Cancer-related causes could include:Factors that may increase the risk of memory problems in cancer survivors include:The severity and duration of the symptoms sometimes described as chemo brain differ from person to person. Most cancer survivors will return to work, but some will find tasks take extra concentration or time. Others may be unable to return to work.If you experience severe memory or concentration problems that make it difficult to do your job, tell your doctor. You may be referred to an occupational therapist or a neuropsychologist, who can help you adjust to your current job or identify your strengths so that you may find a new job.In rare cases, people with memory and concentration problems are unable to work and may consider applying for disability benefits. Ask your health care team for a referral to an oncology social worker or a similar professional who can help you understand your options.Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Cancer: Managing Symptoms support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.83 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 14 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 108 Replies Wed, Jun 12, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship