Chest pain appears in many forms, ranging from a sharp stab to a dull ache. Sometimes chest pain feels crushing or burning. In certain cases, the pain travels up the neck and into the jaw and then spreads to the back or down one or both arms.Many different problems can cause chest pain. The most life-threatening causes involve the heart or lungs. Because chest pain can be due to a serious problem, it's important to seek immediate medical help.Chest pain can feel different depending on what's triggering the symptom. Often, the cause has nothing to do with the heart — though there's no easy way to tell without seeing a health care provider.Chest pain is often associated with heart disease. But many people with heart disease say they have a mild discomfort that they wouldn't really call pain. Chest discomfort due to a heart attack or another heart problem may feel like:It can be difficult to tell if chest pain is related to the heart or caused by something else. Usually, chest pain is less likely due to a heart problem if it happens with:The classic symptoms of heartburn — a painful, burning sensation behind the breastbone — can be caused by problems with the heart or the stomach.If you have new or unexplained chest pain or think you're having a heart attack, call 911 or emergency medical help immediately. Don't ignore the symptoms of a heart attack. If you can't get an ambulance or emergency vehicle to come to you, have a neighbor or a friend drive you to the nearest hospital. Drive yourself only if you have no other option.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesChest pain has many possible causes, all of which need medical care.Examples of heart-related causes of chest pain include:Chest pain can be caused by disorders of the digestive system, including:Some types of chest pain are associated with injuries and other problems affecting the structures that make up the chest wall. These conditions include:Many lung problems can cause chest pain, including:Chest pain also can be caused by:Chest pain care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart & Blood Health support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.346 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 58 Replies Thu, Jun 20, 2024 106 Replies Wed, Jun 19, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Angina.Heart attack.Aortic dissection.Inflammation of the sac around the heart, called pericarditis.Heartburn.Swallowing disorders.Gallbladder or pancreas problems.Costochondritis.Sore muscles.Injured ribs.A blood clot in the lung, called a pulmonary embolism.Inflammation of the membrane covering the lungs, called pleurisy.Collapsed lung.High blood pressure in the lung arteries, called pulmonary hypertension.Panic attack.Shingles.Advertising & Sponsorship