In Chiari malformation surgery, a small section of bone at the back of the skull is removed. This makes room for the part of the brain called the cerebellum. It also relieves pressure on the brainstem, cerebellum and spinal cord.Chiari malformation (kee-AH-ree mal-for-MAY-shun) is a condition in which brain tissue extends into the spinal canal. It occurs when part of the skull is misshapen or smaller than is typical. The skull presses on the brain and forces it downward.Chiari malformation is not common, but increased use of imaging tests has led to more diagnoses.Health care professionals group Chiari malformation into three types. The type depends on the anatomy of the brain tissue that is pushed into the spinal canal. The type also depends on whether there are developmental changes of the brain or spine.Chiari malformation type 1 develops as the skull and brain are growing. Symptoms may not occur until late childhood or adulthood. The pediatric forms of Chiari malformation are type 2 and type 3. These types are present at birth, which is known as congenital.Treatment of Chiari malformation depends on the type and the symptoms. Regular monitoring, medicines and surgery are treatment options. Sometimes no treatment is needed.Many people with Chiari malformation have no symptoms and don't need treatment. They learn they have Chiari malformation only when tests are performed for unrelated conditions. But some types of Chiari malfunction can cause symptoms.The more common types of Chiari malformation are:These types are less serious than the rarer pediatric form, type 3. But symptoms still can disrupt life.In Chiari malformation type 1, symptoms usually appear during late childhood or adulthood.Bad headaches are the classic symptom of Chiari malformation. They generally occur after sudden coughing, sneezing or straining. People with Chiari malformation type 1 also can experience:Less often, people with Chiari malformation may experience:In Chiari malformation type 2, a greater amount of tissue extends into the spinal canal compared with that in Chiari malformation type 1.Symptoms can include those related to a form of spina bifida called myelomeningocele. Chiari malformation type 2 nearly always occurs with myelomeningocele. In myelomeningocele, the backbone and the spinal canal don't close properly before birth.Symptoms may include:Chiari malformation type 2 is usually noted with ultrasound during pregnancy. It also may be diagnosed after birth or in early infancy.Chiari malformation type 3 is the most serious type of the condition. A portion of the lower back part of the brain, known as the cerebellum, or the brainstem extend through an opening in the skull. This form of Chiari malformation is diagnosed at birth or during pregnancy with an ultrasound.Chiari malformation type 3 causes brain and nervous system issues and has a higher rate of death.See a health care professional if you or your child has any of the symptoms that may be associated with Chiari malformation.Many symptoms of Chiari malformation also can be caused by other conditions. A full medical evaluation is important.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesChiari malformation type 1 occurs when part of the skull is too small or is misshapen. This part of the skull contains the area of the brain called the cerebellum. The skull puts pressure on and crowds the brain. As a result, the lower part of the cerebellum known as the tonsils are pushed into the upper spinal canal.Chiari malformation type 2 is nearly always associated with a form of spina bifida called myelomeningocele.When the cerebellum is pushed into the upper spinal canal, it can interfere with the usual flow of cerebrospinal fluid that protects the brain and spinal cord. Cerebrospinal fluid can build up in the brain or spinal cord. Or it can cause signals transmitted from the brain to the body to be blocked.Also, the pressure from the cerebellum on the spinal cord or lower brainstem can cause symptoms.There's evidence that Chiari malformation runs in some families. However, research into a possible hereditary component is still in its early phase.In some people, Chiari malformation may have no symptoms and they don't need treatment. In others, Chiari malformation gets worse over time and leads to serious complications. Complications may include:Chiari malformation care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Hydrocephalus.Spina bifida.Syringomyelia.Tethered cord syndrome.Advertising & Sponsorship