Chlamydia (kluh-MID-e-uh) is a common sexually transmitted disease.Sexually transmitted diseases are infections spread mainly by contact with genitals or bodily fluids. Also called STDs, STIs or venereal disease, sexually transmitted infections are caused by bacteria, viruses or parasites.Chlamydia is caused by Chlamydia trachomatis (truh-KOH-muh-tis) bacteria and spread through oral, vaginal or anal sex.You might not know you have chlamydia because many people don't have symptoms, such as genital pain and discharge from the vagina or penis. Chlamydia trachomatis affects mostly young women, but it can occur in both men and women and in all age groups.It's not difficult to treat, but if left untreated it can lead to more-serious health problems.Early-stage Chlamydia trachomatis infections often cause few symptoms. Even when symptoms occur, they're often mild. That makes them easy to overlook, which is why regular screening is important.Symptoms of Chlamydia trachomatis infection can include:Depending on a person's sexual activity, Chlamydia trachomatis can infect the eyes, throat or rectum.Eye infections, called conjunctivitis, cause the inside of the eyelid to be red and irritated. In the throat, an infection may have no symptoms, or a person may have a sore throat. An infection in the rectum may have no symptoms or may cause rectal pain, discharge or bleeding.See your healthcare professional if you have a discharge from your vagina, penis or rectum, or if you have pain during urination. Also, see your healthcare team if you learn your sexual partner has chlamydia. Your healthcare professional will likely prescribe an antibiotic even if you have no symptoms.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe Chlamydia trachomatis bacterium is most commonly spread through vaginal, oral and anal sex. It also is possible for the bacterium to spread in pregnancy, during delivery of the baby. Chlamydia can cause pneumonia or a serious eye infection in the newborn.People who have sex before age 25 are at higher risk of chlamydia than are older people. That's because younger people are more likely to have more than one risk factor.Risk factors for chlamydia include: Chlamydia trachomatis can be associated with:The surest way to prevent chlamydia infection is to abstain from sexual activities. Short of that, you can:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Pelvic inflammatory disease, also called PID.Infection near the testicles.Prostate gland infection.Infections in newborns.Ectopic pregnancy.Infertility.Reactive arthritis.Use condoms.Limit your number of sex partners.Get regular screenings.Advertising & Sponsorship