The gallbladder stores bile, a yellow-green fluid produced in the liver. Bile flows from your liver into your gallbladder, where it's held until needed during the digestion of food. When you eat, your gallbladder releases bile into the bile duct, where it's carried to the upper part of the small intestine, called the duodenum, to help break down fat in food.Cholecystitis (ko-luh-sis-TIE-tis) is inflammation of the gallbladder. The gallbladder is a small, pear-shaped organ on the right side of the belly (abdomen), beneath the liver. The gallbladder holds a digestive fluid (bile) that's released into the small intestine.In most cases, gallstones blocking the tube leading out of the gallbladder cause cholecystitis. This results in a bile buildup that can cause inflammation. Other causes of cholecystitis include bile duct problems, tumors, serious illness and certain infections.If left untreated, cholecystitis can lead to severe, sometimes life-threatening complications, such as a gallbladder rupture. Treatment for cholecystitis often involves surgery to remove the gallbladder.Symptoms of cholecystitis may include:Cholecystitis symptoms often occur after a meal, particularly a large or fatty one.Make an appointment with your health care provider if you have symptoms that worry you. If your abdominal pain is so severe that you can't sit still or get comfortable, have someone drive you to the emergency room.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care.If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.Please, try again in a couple of minutesGallstones are hardened deposits of bile that can form in your gallbladder. Bile is a digestive fluid made in your liver and stored in your gallbladder. When you eat, your gallbladder contracts and empties bile into your small intestine.Cholecystitis is when your gallbladder is inflamed. Gallbladder inflammation can be caused by:Having gallstones is the main risk factor for developing cholecystitis.If untreated, cholecystitis can lead to a number of serious complications, including:You can reduce your risk of cholecystitis by taking the following steps to prevent gallstones:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Gallstones.Tumor.Bile duct blockage.Infection.Severe illness.Infection within the gallbladder.Death of gallbladder tissue.Torn gallbladder.Lose weight slowly.Maintain a healthy weight.Choose a healthy diet.Advertising & Sponsorship