Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a type of cancer of the blood and bone marrow — the spongy tissue inside bones where blood cells are made.The term "chronic" in chronic lymphocytic leukemia comes from the fact that this leukemia typically progresses more slowly than other types of leukemia. The term "lymphocytic" in chronic lymphocytic leukemia comes from the cells affected by the disease — a group of white blood cells called lymphocytes, which help your body fight infection.Chronic lymphocytic leukemia most commonly affects older adults. There are treatments to help control the disease.Many people with chronic lymphocytic leukemia have no symptoms at first. Signs and symptoms might develop as the cancer progresses. They might include:Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs and symptoms that worry you.Doctors aren't certain what starts the process that causes chronic lymphocytic leukemia. What's known is that something happens to cause changes (mutations) in the DNA of blood-producing cells. A cell's DNA contains the instructions that tell the cell what to do. The changes tell the blood cells to produce abnormal, ineffective lymphocytes.Beyond being ineffective, these abnormal lymphocytes continue to live and multiply when healthy lymphocytes would die. The abnormal lymphocytes accumulate in the blood and certain organs, where they cause complications. They may crowd healthy cells out of the bone marrow and interfere with blood cell production.Doctors and researchers are working to understand the exact mechanism that causes chronic lymphocytic leukemia.Factors that may increase the risk of chronic lymphocytic leukemia include:Chronic lymphocytic leukemia may cause complications such as:Chronic lymphocytic leukemia care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Blood Cancers & Disorders support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.157 Replies Tue, Jun 25, 2024 61 Replies Tue, Jun 25, 2024 53 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Your age.Your race.Family history of blood and bone marrow cancers.Exposure to chemicals.A condition that causes excess lymphocytes.Frequent infections.A switch to a more aggressive form of cancer.Increased risk of other cancers.Immune system problems.Advertising & Sponsorship