Most people have headaches from time to time. But if you have a headache more days than not, you might have chronic daily headaches.Rather than a specific headache type, chronic daily headaches include a variety of headache subtypes. Chronic refers to how often the headaches occur and how long the condition lasts.The constant nature of chronic daily headaches makes them one of the most disabling headache conditions. Aggressive initial treatment and steady, long-term management might reduce pain and lead to fewer headaches.By definition, chronic daily headaches occur 15 days or more a month, for longer than three months. True (primary) chronic daily headaches aren't caused by another condition.There are short-lasting and long-lasting chronic daily headaches. Long-lasting headaches last more than four hours. They include:This type typically occurs in people with a history of episodic migraines. Chronic migraines tend to:And they cause at least one of the following:These headaches tend to:These headaches come on suddenly, usually in people without a headache history. They become constant within three days of your first headache. They:These headaches:In addition, hemicrania continua headaches are associated with at least one of the following:Occasional headaches are common, and usually require no medical attention. However, consult your doctor if:Seek prompt medical care if your headache:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe causes of many chronic daily headaches aren't well-understood. True (primary) chronic daily headaches don't have an identifiable underlying cause.Conditions that might cause nonprimary chronic daily headaches include:This type of headache usually develops in people who have an episodic headache disorder, usually migraine or tension type, and take too much pain medication. If you're taking pain medications — even over-the-counter — more than two days a week (or nine days a month), you're at risk of developing rebound headaches.Factors associated with developing frequent headaches include:If you have chronic daily headaches, you're also more likely to have depression, anxiety, sleep disturbances, and other psychological and physical problems.Taking care of yourself might help ease chronic daily headaches.Chronic daily headaches care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Avoid headache triggers.Avoid medication overuse.Get enough sleep.Don't skip meals.Exercise regularly.Reduce stress.Reduce caffeine.Advertising & Sponsorship