Chronic pelvic pain is pain in the area below the bellybutton and between the hips that lasts six months or longer.Chronic pelvic pain can have more than one cause. It may be a symptom of another disease, or it can be a condition in its own right.If chronic pelvic pain seems to be caused by another health condition, treating that problem may get rid of the pain.But tests may not be able to find a cause for chronic pelvic pain. In that case, the goal of treatment is to ease pain and other symptoms. That could make your quality of life better.You may feel chronic pelvic pain in different parts of your pelvic area, rather than in just one spot. You might describe the pain in one or more of the following ways:The pain also may happen:Chronic pelvic pain may be mild. Or it may be so intense that you miss work and can't sleep or exercise.Other symptoms can include:In general, see your healthcare professional if the pain disrupts your daily life or if your symptoms seem to get worse.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Get the latest information from our Mayo Clinic experts on women’s health topics, serious and complex conditions, wellness and more. Click to view a preview and subscribe below.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesChronic pelvic pain is a complex health problem. Sometimes, tests may find that a single disease is the cause. In other cases, the pain may stem from more than one medical condition. For example, you might have endometriosis and interstitial cystitis, both of which play a role in chronic pelvic pain.Some causes of chronic pelvic pain include:Many conditions are linked to chronic pelvic pain. Having more than one condition that causes pelvic pain, such as endometriosis and fibroids, raises the risk. A history of sexual or physical abuse also may raise the risk.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Endometriosis.Muscle and bone problems.Chronic pelvic inflammatory disease.Ovarian remnant.Fibroids.Irritable bowel syndrome.Painful bladder syndrome.Pelvic congestion syndrome.Mental health risk factors.Advertising & Sponsorship