An infection, growths in the sinuses, called nasal polyps, or swelling of the lining of the sinuses can cause chronic sinusitis. Symptoms might include a blocked or stuffy nose that makes it hard to breathe through the nose and pain and swelling around the eyes, cheeks, nose or forehead.Chronic sinusitis causes the spaces inside the nose and head, called sinuses, to become inflamed and swollen. The condition lasts 12 weeks or longer, even with treatment.This common condition keeps mucus from draining. It makes the nose stuffy. Breathing through the nose might be hard. The area around the eyes might feel swollen or tender.Infection, growths in the sinuses, called nasal polyps, and swelling of the lining of the sinuses might all be part of chronic sinusitis. Chronic sinusitis is also called chronic rhinosinusitis. The condition affects adults and children.Common symptoms of chronic sinusitis include:Other symptoms can include:Chronic sinusitis and acute sinusitis have similar symptoms. But acute sinusitis is a short-lived infection of the sinuses often linked to a cold.The symptoms of chronic sinusitis last at least 12 weeks. There might be many bouts of acute sinusitis before it becomes chronic sinusitis. Fever isn't common with chronic sinusitis. But fever might be part of acute sinusitis.See a health care provider right away if you have symptoms that could mean a serious infection:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesNasal polyps are soft growths on the lining of the nose or the spaces inside the nose, known as sinuses. Nasal polyps aren't cancer. Nasal polyps often occur in groups, like grapes on a stem.The cause of chronic sinusitis usually is not known. Some medical conditions, including cystic fibrosis, can cause chronic sinusitis in children and teens.Some conditions can make chronic sinusitis worse. These include:The following factors raise the risk of getting chronic sinusitis:Serious complications of chronic sinusitis are rare. They can include:Take these steps to lower the risk of getting chronic sinusitis:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.See a health care provider right away ifA common coldA problem inside the nose,Vision problems.Infections.Protect your health.Manage allergies.Avoid cigarette smoke and polluted air.Use a humidifier.Advertising & Sponsorship