Chronic granulomatous (gran-u-LOM-uh-tus) disease (CGD) is an inherited disorder that occurs when a type of white blood cell, called a phagocyte, doesn't work properly. Phagocytes usually help your body fight infections. When they don't work as they should, phagocytes can't protect your body from bacterial and fungal infections.People with chronic granulomatous disease may develop infections in their lungs, skin, lymph nodes, liver, stomach and intestines, or other areas. They also may develop clusters of white blood cells in infected areas. Most people are diagnosed with CGD during childhood, but some people may not be diagnosed until adulthood.People with chronic granulomatous disease experience serious bacterial or fungal infection every few years. An infection in the lungs, including pneumonia, is common. People with CGD may develop a serious type of fungal pneumonia after being exposed to dead leaves, mulch or hay.It's also common for people with CGD to experience infections of the skin, liver, stomach and intestines, brain, and eyes. Symptoms associated with infections include:If you think you or your child has a type of fungal pneumonia from being around dead leaves, mulch or hay, get medical care right away. If you or your child has frequent infections and the symptoms listed above, talk to your health care provider.A change in one of five genes can cause CGD. People with CGD inherit the changed gene from a parent. These genes produce proteins that form an enzyme. This enzyme helps your immune system work properly. The enzyme is active in white blood cells, called phagocytes, that protect you from infections by destroying fungi and bacteria. The enzyme is also active in immune cells that help your body heal.When there are changes to one of these genes, the protective proteins are not produced. Or they're produced, but they don't function properly.Some people with CGD don't have one of these changed genes. In these cases, health care providers don't know what causes the condition.Boys are more likely to have CGD.Chronic granulomatous disease care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Blood Cancers & Disorders support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.53 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 60 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 107 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship