Churg-Strauss syndrome is a disorder marked by blood vessel inflammation. This inflammation can restrict blood flow to organs and tissues, sometimes permanently damaging them. This condition is also known as eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (EGPA).Adult-onset asthma is the most common sign of Churg-Strauss syndrome. The disorder can also cause other problems, such as nasal allergies, sinus problems, rash, gastrointestinal bleeding, and pain and numbness in your hands and feet.Churg-Strauss syndrome is rare and has no cure. Symptoms can usually be controlled with steroids and other powerful immunosuppressant drugs.Churg-Strauss syndrome varies greatly from person to person. Some people have only mild symptoms. Others have severe or life-threatening complications.Also known as EGPA, the syndrome tends to occur in three stages and gets progressively worse. Almost everyone with the condition has asthma, chronic sinusitis and elevated counts of white blood cells called eosinophils.Other signs and symptoms might include:See your doctor if you develop breathing difficulties or a runny nose that doesn't go away, especially if it's accompanied by persistent facial pain. Also see your doctor if you have asthma or nasal allergies that suddenly worsen.Churg-Strauss syndrome is rare, and it's more likely that these symptoms have some other cause. But it's important that your doctor evaluate them. Early diagnosis and treatment improve the chances of a good outcome.The cause of Churg-Strauss syndrome is largely unknown. It's likely that a combination of genes and environmental factors, such as allergens or certain medications, triggers an overactive immune system response. Instead of protecting against invading bacteria and viruses, the immune system targets healthy tissue, causing widespread inflammation.While anyone can get Churg-Strauss syndrome, people are usually around age 50 when diagnosed. Other potential risk factors include chronic asthma or nasal problems. Genetics and exposures to environmental allergens also may play a role.Churg-Strauss syndrome can affect many organs, including the lungs, sinuses, skin, gastrointestinal system, kidneys, muscles, joints and heart. Without treatment, the disease can be fatal.Complications, which depend on the organs involved, can include:Feb 07, 2024CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.