Learn more about cirrhosis from transplant hepatologist Sumera Ilyas, M.B.B.S.[Music playing]Mayo Clinic explains cirrhosisSumera I. Ilyas, M.B.B.S., Transplant Hepatologist, Mayo Clinic I'm Dr. Sumera Ilyas, a transplant hepatologist at Mayo Clinic. In this video, we'll cover the basics of cirrhosis. What is it? Who gets it? The symptoms, diagnosis and treatment. Whether you're looking for answers for yourself or someone you love, we're here to give you the best information available.What is it?Put simply, cirrhosis is scarring of the liver. Any time an organ is injured, it tries to repair itself. And when this happens, scar tissue forms. As more scar tissue forms in the liver, it becomes harder for it to function. Cirrhosis is usually a result of liver damage from conditions such as hepatitis B or C, or chronic alcohol use. The damage done by cirrhosis typically cannot be undone. But if caught early enough and depending on the cause, there is a chance of slowing it with treatment. And even in the most severe cases, liver transplants and new treatments provide those suffering from cirrhosis with hope.Who gets it?Any kind of disease or condition that harms the liver can lead to cirrhosis over time. About 2% of American adults have liver disease, and therefore are at risk of developing cirrhosis. However, those who drink too much alcohol, those who are overweight and those with viral hepatitis are at a greater risk. Not everyone with these risk factors develop cirrhosis. These are the leading causes of liver disease. A wide range of other conditions and diseases can cause cirrhosis as well. Some include inflammation and scarring of the bile ducts, known as primary sclerosing cholangitis; iron buildup in the body - what we call hemochromatosis; copper accumulation in the liver, which is a rare condition called Wilson's disease; and inflammation from the body's own immune system harming liver cells, known as autoimmune hepatitis.What are the symptoms?Often, cirrhosis shows no signs or symptoms until liver damage is extensive. When symptoms do occur, they may first include fatigue; weakness and weight loss; nausea; bruising or bleeding easily; swelling in your legs, feet or ankles; itchy skin; redness on the palms of your hands; and spider-like blood vessels on your skin. During later stages, you might develop jaundice, which is yellowing of the eyes or skin; gastrointestinal bleeding; abdominal swelling from fluid building up in the belly; and confusion or drowsiness. If you notice any of these symptoms, you should speak to your doctor.How is it diagnosed?Since you may not have any symptoms in the early stages of the disease, cirrhosis is often detected through routine blood tests or checkups. If your doctor finds something suspicious, further blood tests may be necessary. These can help identify how extensive your cirrhosis is by checking for liver malfunction, liver damage, or screening for causes of cirrhosis such as hepatitis viruses. Based on the results, your doctor maybe able to diagnose the underlying cause of cirrhosis. They may also recommend imaging tests like an MR elastogram that checks for scarring in the liver or an MRI of the abdomen, CT scan or an ultrasound. A biopsy may also be required to identify the severity, extent and cause of liver damage.How is it treated?Although the damage caused by cirrhosis is not reversible, treatment can slow the progression of the disease, alleviate symptoms, and prevent complications. In cases of early cirrhosis, it is possible to minimize damage to the liver by tackling the underlying causes. For instance, treating alcohol addiction, losing weight, and using medications to treat viral hepatitis and other conditions can limit damage to the liver. Once the liver stops functioning, an organ transplant may be an option. During a transplant, surgeons remove the damaged liver and replace it with a healthy working liver. In fact, cirrhosis is one of the most common reasons for a liver transplant. You and your medical team will need to assess if you are an appropriate candidate through a transplant evaluation. Surgery is a big undertaking, one that brings its own risks and complications, and it should always be a decision between you, your family, and your doctors.What now?If you're concerned about your risk of cirrhosis, talk to your doctor. Life with cirrhosis can be challenging, but with the right information, the right medical team and the right treatment, there's reason to be encouraged. Health professionals learn more and more every day about the conditions and diseases that damage our livers. Studies investigating new treatments that can slow and even reverse the scarring that leads to cirrhosis are currently underway. For those with cirrhosis, the future is brighter than ever before. If you'd like to learn even more about cirrhosis, watch our other related videos or visit mayoclinic.org. We wish you well.[Music playing]A healthy liver, at left, shows no signs of scarring. In cirrhosis, at right, scar tissue replaces healthy liver tissue.Cirrhosis is severe scarring of the liver. This serious condition can be caused by many forms of liver diseases and conditions, such as hepatitis or chronic alcoholism.Each time your liver is injured — whether by excessive alcohol consumption or another cause, such as infection — it tries to repair itself. In the process, scar tissue forms. As cirrhosis gets worse, more and more scar tissue forms, making it difficult for the liver to do its job. Advanced cirrhosis is life-threatening.The liver damage caused by cirrhosis generally can't be undone. But if liver cirrhosis is diagnosed early and the underlying cause is treated, further damage can be limited. In rare cases, it may be reversed.The liver is the largest internal organ in the body. It's about the size of a football. It sits mainly in the upper right portion of the stomach area, above the stomach.Cirrhosis often has no symptoms until liver damage is severe. When symptoms do occur, they may include:Make an appointment with your health care provider if you have any of the symptoms listed above.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free, and receive liver transplant and decompensated cirrhosis content, plus expertise on liver health.ErrorSelect a locationErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You will receive the first liver transplant and decompensated cirrhosis email in your inbox shortly. When seeking answers, people often look to experts for clear and accurate information. By subscribing to decompensated cirrhosis and liver transplant content from Mayo Clinic, you have taken an important first step in gaining knowledge and using it for your overall health and well-being.If you don't receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com. Please, try again in a couple of minutesA wide range of diseases and conditions can damage the liver and lead to cirrhosis.Some of the causes include:Complications of cirrhosis can include:Lower your risk of cirrhosis by taking these steps to care for your liver:If you're concerned about your risk of liver cirrhosis, talk to your health care provider about ways you can reduce your risk.Cirrhosis care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Transplants support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.1606 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 15 Replies Fri, Jun 21, 2024 100 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.[Music playing]Mayo Clinic explains cirrhosisSumera I. Ilyas, M.B.B.S., Transplant Hepatologist, Mayo ClinicWhat is it?Who gets it?What are the symptoms?How is it diagnosed?How is it treated?What now?[Music playing]Drinking too much alcohol.Being overweight.Having viral hepatitis.High blood pressure in the veins that supply the liver.Swelling in the legs and abdomen.Enlargement of the spleen.Bleeding.Infections.Malnutrition.Buildup of toxins in the brain.Jaundice.Bone disease.Increased risk of liver cancer.Acute-on-chronic cirrhosis.Do not drink alcohol if you have cirrhosis.Eat a healthy diet.Maintain a healthy weight.Reduce your risk of hepatitis.Advertising & Sponsorship