Doctors use the term "clubfoot" to describe a range of foot abnormalities usually present at birth (congenital). In most cases, the front of the foot is twisted downward and inward, the arch is increased, and the heel is turned inward. Untreated, the foot can't move up and down as it normally would, and this can cause the child to walk on the side of the foot.Clubfoot describes a range of foot abnormalities usually present at birth (congenital) in which your baby's foot is twisted out of shape or position. In clubfoot, the tissues connecting the muscles to the bone (tendons) are shorter than usual. Clubfoot is a fairly common birth defect and is usually an isolated problem for an otherwise healthy newborn.Clubfoot can be mild or severe. About half of children with clubfoot have it in both feet. If your child has clubfoot, it will make it harder to walk normally, so doctors generally recommend treating it soon after birth.Doctors are usually able to treat clubfoot successfully without surgery, though sometimes children need follow-up surgery later on.If your child has clubfoot, here's what it might look like:Despite its look, clubfoot itself doesn't cause any discomfort or pain.More than likely your doctor will notice clubfoot soon after your child is born, based on appearance. Your doctor can advise you on the most appropriate treatment or refer you to a doctor who specializes in bone and muscle problems (pediatric orthopedist).The cause of clubfoot is unknown (idiopathic), but it may be a combination of genetics and environment.Boys are about twice as likely to develop clubfoot than girls are.Risk factors include:Clubfoot typically doesn't cause any problems until your child starts to stand and walk. If the clubfoot is treated, your child will most likely walk fairly normally. He or she may have some difficulty with:However, if not treated, clubfoot causes more-serious problems. These can include:Because doctors don't know what causes clubfoot, you can't completely prevent it. However, if you're pregnant, you can do things to limit your baby's risk of birth defects, such as:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Family history.Congenital conditions.Environment.Not enough amniotic fluid during pregnancy.Movement.Leg length.Shoe size.Calf size.Arthritis.Poor self-image.Inability to walk normally.Problems stemming from walking adjustments.Advertising & Sponsorship