Coarctation of the aorta is a narrowing (constriction) in a part of the body's main artery (aorta). The heart must pump more forcefully to send blood through the aorta and on to the rest of the body.The aorta is the largest artery in the body. It moves oxygen-rich blood from the heart to the rest of the body. Aortic coarctation (ko-ahrk-TAY-shun) is a narrowing of the aorta. It forces the heart to pump harder to move blood through the aorta.Coarctation of the aorta is generally present at birth (congenital heart defect). Symptoms can range from mild to severe. The condition might not be detected until adulthood.Coarctation of the aorta often occurs along with other congenital heart defects. Treatment is usually successful, but the condition requires careful lifelong follow-up.Coarctation of the aorta symptoms depend on how much of the aorta is narrowed. Most people don't have symptoms. Mild coarctation may not be diagnosed until adulthood.Babies with severe coarctation of the aorta may show symptoms shortly after birth. Symptoms of coarctation of the aorta in infants include:Symptoms of coarctation of the aorta after infancy commonly include:Depending on where the coarctation is located, blood pressure may be high in the arms and low in the legs and ankles.Coarctation of the aorta often occurs with other heart defects. Other symptoms depend on the type of congenital heart defect.Seek medical help if you or your child has the following symptoms:A complete health checkup helps determine the cause. If you or your child has sudden, unexplained chest pain, seek emergency medical care.The cause of coarctation of the aorta is unclear. The condition is generally a heart problem present at birth (congenital heart defect).Rarely, coarctation of the aorta develops later in life. Conditions or events that can narrow the aorta and cause this condition include:Coarctation of the aorta can affect any part of the aorta, but it's most often located near a blood vessel called the ductus arteriosus. That blood vessel connects the left pulmonary artery to the aorta.With coarctation of the aorta, the left lower heart chamber (left ventricle) works harder to pump blood through the narrowed aorta. As a result, blood pressure rises in the left ventricle. The wall of the left ventricle may become thick (hypertrophy).Coarctation of the aorta is more common in males than in females. Having certain genetic conditions, such as Turner syndrome, also raises the risk of coarctation of the aorta.Coarctation of the aorta often occurs along with other congenital heart defects. Heart conditions associated with coarctation include:Prompt treatment is needed to help prevent complications. Without treatment, coarctation of the aorta in babies may lead to heart failure or death.Long-term (chronic) high blood pressure is the most common complication of coarctation of the aorta. Blood pressure usually drops after repair surgery. But it may still be higher than usual.Other complications of coarctation of the aorta may include:If the coarctation of the aorta is severe, the heart might not be able to pump enough blood to the other organs. This can cause heart damage. It may lead to kidney failure or other organ failure.Complications are also possible after treatment for coarctation of the aorta. These include:People with coarctation of the aorta need regular health checkups for life.There's no known way to prevent coarctation of the aorta. Early detection can help prevent complications. Talk to your health care provider if you or your child has a condition that increases the risk of aortic coarctation, such as Turner syndrome, bicuspid aortic valve or another heart defect. Also tell your provider if you have a family history of congenital heart disease.Coarctation of the aorta care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart & Blood Health support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.346 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 58 Replies Thu, Jun 20, 2024 106 Replies Wed, Jun 19, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Bicuspid aortic valve.Subaortic stenosis.Patent ductus arteriosus.Holes in the wall between the left and right sides of the heart.Congenital mitral valve stenosis.Advertising & Sponsorship