A colon polyp is a small clump of cells that forms on the lining of the colon. Most colon polyps are harmless. But over time, some colon polyps can develop into colon cancer. Colon cancer can be fatal when found in its later stages.Anyone can develop colon polyps. You're at higher risk if you are 50 or older, are overweight or are a smoker. You're also at higher risk if you have a personal or family history of colon polyps or colon cancer.Colon polyps don't usually cause symptoms. It's important to have regular screening tests because colon polyps found in the early stages can usually be removed safely and completely. The best prevention for colon cancer is regular screening for and removal of polyps.Most people with colon polyps do not have any symptoms. You might not know you have a polyp until your health care provider finds it during an exam of your colon.However, some people with colon polyps may have:See your health care provider if you experience:You should be screened regularly for polyps if:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care.If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.Please, try again in a couple of minutesHealthy cells grow and divide in an orderly way. Changes in certain genes can cause cells to continue dividing even when new cells aren't needed. In the colon and rectum, this continued growth of cells can cause polyps to form. Polyps can grow anywhere in the large intestine.There are two main categories of polyps, nonneoplastic and neoplastic. Nonneoplastic polyps typically do not become cancerous. Neoplastic polyps include adenomas and serrated types. Adenomas are the most likely to turn into cancer if given enough time to grow. Serrated polyps also may become cancerous, depending on their size and location. In general for neoplastic polyps, the larger the polyp, the greater the risk of cancer.Factors that might cause colon polyps or cancer include:Rarely, people inherit genetic irregularities that cause colon polyps to form. If you have one of these genes, you are at a much higher risk of developing colon cancer. Screening and early detection can help prevent the growth or spread of these cancers.Hereditary disorders that cause colon polyps include:Some colon polyps may become cancerous. The earlier polyps are removed, the less likely it is that they will become cancerous.You can greatly reduce your risk of colon polyps and colorectal cancer by having regular screenings. Certain lifestyle changes also can help:Colon polyps care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Change in bowel habits.Change in stool color.Iron deficiency anemia.Pain.Rectal bleeding.Age.Having inflammatory intestinal conditions.Family history.Smoking and excess alcohol use.Obesity, lack of exercise and fat intake.Race.Lynch syndrome,Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP),Gardner syndrome,MUTYH-associated polyposis (MAP),Peutz-Jeghers syndrome,Serrated polyposis syndrome,Adopt healthy habits.Talk to your health care provider about calcium and vitamin D.Consider your options if you're at high risk.Advertising & Sponsorship