Colon cancer can happen in any part of the colon. An exam of the whole colon using a long, flexible tube with a camera is one way to detect colon cancer and polyps. This exam is called a colonoscopy.Colon cancer is a growth of cells that begins in a part of the large intestine called the colon. The colon is the first and longest part of the large intestine. The large intestine is the last part of the digestive system. The digestive system breaks down food for the body to use.Colon cancer typically affects older adults, though it can happen at any age. It usually begins as small clumps of cells called polyps that form inside the colon. Polyps generally aren't cancerous, but some can turn into colon cancers over time.Polyps often don't cause symptoms. For this reason, doctors recommend regular screening tests to look for polyps in the colon. Finding and removing polyps helps prevent colon cancer.If colon cancer develops, many treatments can help control it. Treatments include surgery, radiation therapy and medicines, such as chemotherapy, targeted therapy and immunotherapy.Colon cancer is sometimes called colorectal cancer. This term combines colon cancer and rectal cancer, which begins in the rectum.Many people with colon cancer don't have symptoms at first. When symptoms appear, they'll likely depend on the cancer's size and where it is in the large intestine.Symptoms of colon cancer can include:If you notice lasting symptoms that worry you, make an appointment with a health care professional.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and receive the latest on colon cancer treatment, care and management.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You will receive the first colon cancer care journey message in your inbox shortly, which will include the latest treatment options, innovations and other information from our colon cancer experts.Please, try again in a couple of minutesDoctors aren't certain what causes most colon cancers.Colon cancer happens when cells in the colon develop changes in their DNA. A cells' DNA holds the instructions that tell the cell what to do. The changes tell the cells to multiply quickly. The changes let the cells continue living when healthy cells die as part of their natural lifecycle.This causes too many cells. The cells might form a mass called a tumor. The cells can invade and destroy healthy body tissue. In time, the cells can break away and spread to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads, it's called metastatic cancer.Factors that may increase the risk of colon cancer include:Doctors recommend that people with an average risk of colon cancer consider starting colon cancer screening around age 45. But people with an increased risk should think about starting screening sooner. People with an increased risk include those with a family history of colon cancer.There are several different tests that are used for colon cancer screening. Talk about your options with your health care team.Making changes in everyday life can reduce the risk of colon cancer. To lower the risk of colon cancer:Some medicines can reduce the risk of colon polyps or colon cancer. For instance, some evidence links a reduced risk of polyps and colon cancer to regular use of aspirin or aspirin-like medicines. But it's not clear what dose and what length of time would be needed to reduce the risk of colon cancer. Taking aspirin daily has some risks, including ulcers and bleeding in the digestive system.These options are generally reserved for people with a high risk of colon cancer. There isn't enough evidence to recommend these medicines to people who have an average risk of colon cancer.If you have an increased risk of colon cancer, discuss your risk factors with your health care team to see if preventive medicines are safe for you.Colon cancer care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Colorectal Cancer support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.57 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 87 Replies Mon, Jun 17, 2024 35 Replies Wed, Jun 12, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Older age.Black race.A personal history of colorectal cancer or polyps.Inflammatory bowel diseases.Inherited syndromes that increase colon cancer risk.Family history of colon cancer.Low-fiber, high-fat diet.Not exercising regularly.Diabetes.Obesity.Smoking.Drinking alcohol.Radiation therapy for cancer.Eat a variety of fruits, vegetables and whole grains.Drink alcohol in moderation, if at all.Stop smoking.Exercise most days of the week.Maintain a healthy weight.Advertising & Sponsorship