The common cold is an illness affecting your nose and throat. Most often, it's harmless, but it might not feel that way. Germs called viruses cause a common cold.Often, adults may have two or three colds each year. Infants and young children may have colds more often.Most people recover from a common cold in 7 to 10 days. Symptoms might last longer in people who smoke. Most often, you don't need medical care for a common cold. If symptoms don't get better or if they get worse, see your health care provider.Illnesses of the nose and throat caused by germs are called upper respiratory tract infections.Most often, common cold symptoms start 1 to 3 days after someone is exposed to a cold virus. Symptoms vary. They can include:The mucus from your nose may start out clear and become thicker and yellow or green. This change is normal. Most often, it doesn't mean that you have a bacterial illness.For adults. Most often, you don't need medical care for a common cold. But see your health care provider if you have:For children. Most children with a common cold don't need to see a health care provider. Get medical care right away if your child has any of the following:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesMany viruses can cause a common cold. Rhinoviruses are the most common cause.A cold virus enters the body through the mouth, eyes or nose. The virus can spread by:These factors can increase the chances of getting a cold:These conditions can occur along with your cold:There's no vaccine for the common cold. You can take these steps to slow the spread of the virus and prevent illness:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.For adults.For children.Age.Weakened immune system.Time of year.Smoking.Exposure.Middle ear infection.Asthma.Sinusitis.Other illnesses.Wash your hands.Clean and disinfect.Cover your cough.Don't share.Stay away from people with colds.Review your child care center's policies.Take care of yourself.Advertising & Sponsorship