Common warts can grow on your hands or fingers. They're small, grainy bumps that are rough to the touch.Common warts are small, grainy skin growths that occur most often on the fingers or hands. They're rough to the touch and often have tiny black dots. These dots are clotted blood vessels.Common warts are caused by a virus and are transmitted by touch. It can take 2 to 6 months for a wart to develop. The warts are usually harmless and over time go away on their own. But many people choose to remove them because they find them bothersome or embarrassing.Common warts symptoms include:See a healthcare professional for common warts if:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesCommon warts are caused by the human papillomavirus, also called HPV. There are more than 100 types of this common virus, but only a few cause warts on the hands. Some strains of HPV are spread through sexual contact. But most are spread by casual skin contact or shared objects, such as towels or washcloths. The virus usually spreads through breaks in the skin, such as hangnails or scrapes. Biting your nails also can cause warts to spread on your fingertips and around your nails.Each person's immune system responds to HPV differently. So not everyone who comes in contact with HPV develops warts.People at higher risk of developing common warts include:To help prevent common warts:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship