Complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) is a form of chronic pain that usually affects an arm or a leg. complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) typically develops after an injury, a surgery, a stroke or a heart attack. The pain is out of proportion to the severity of the initial injury. CRPS is uncommon, and its cause isn't clearly understood. Treatment is most effective when started early. In such cases, improvement and even remission are possible.Signs and symptoms of CRPS include:Symptoms may change over time and vary from person to person. Pain, swelling, redness, noticeable changes in temperature and hypersensitivity (particularly to cold and touch) usually occur first.Over time, the affected limb can become cold and pale. It may undergo skin and nail changes as well as muscle spasms and tightening. Once these changes occur, the condition is often irreversible.CRPS occasionally may spread from its source to elsewhere in the body, such as the opposite limb.In some people, signs and symptoms of CRPS go away on their own. In others, signs and symptoms may persist for months to years. Treatment is likely to be most effective when started early in the course of the illness.If you experience constant, severe pain that affects a limb and makes touching or moving that limb seem intolerable, see your health care provider to determine the cause. It's important to treat CRPS early.The cause of CRPS isn't completely understood. It's thought to be caused by an injury to or difference in the peripheral and central nervous systems. CRPS typically occurs as a result of a trauma or an injury. CRPS occurs in two types, with similar signs and symptoms, but different causes:Many cases of CRPS occur after a forceful trauma to an arm or a leg. This can include a crushing injury or a fracture.Other major and minor traumas — such as surgery, heart attacks, infections and even sprained ankles — also can lead to CRPS.It's not well understood why these injuries can trigger CRPS. Not everyone who has such an injury will go on to develop CRPS. It might be due to an interaction between your central and peripheral nervous systems that isn't typical and different inflammatory responses.If CRPS isn't diagnosed and treated early, the disease may progress to more-disabling signs and symptoms.These steps might help you reduce the risk of developing CRPS:May 10, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.