Compulsive sexual behavior is sometimes called hypersexuality or sexual addiction. It's an intense focus on sexual fantasies, urges or behaviors that can't be controlled. This causes distress and problems for your health, job, relationships or other parts of your life.Compulsive sexual behavior may involve different kinds of commonly enjoyable sexual experiences. Examples include masturbation, sexual arousal by using a computer to communicate, multiple sexual partners, use of pornography or paying for sex. But when these sexual behaviors become a major, constant focus in your life, are difficult to control, cause problems in your life, or are harmful to you or others, that's likely compulsive sexual behavior.No matter what it's called or the exact nature of the behavior, untreated compulsive sexual behavior can damage your self-esteem, relationships, career, health and other people. But with treatment and self-help, you can learn to manage compulsive sexual behavior.Some signs that you may have compulsive sexual behavior include:Ask for help if you feel you've lost control of your sexual behavior, especially if your behavior causes problems for you or other people. Compulsive sexual behavior tends to get worse over time without treatment, so get help when you first notice a problem.As you decide whether to seek professional help, ask yourself:Getting help for compulsive sexual behavior can be difficult because it's such a deeply personal and private matter. Try to:Ask a health care provider for help right away if:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesAlthough the exact causes of compulsive sexual behavior are not clear, possible causes may include:Compulsive sexual behavior can happen in both men and women, though it may be more common in men. It can affect anyone, regardless of sexual orientation. Factors that may increase the risk of compulsive sexual behavior include:Also, the risk of compulsive sexual behavior may be higher in people who have:Compulsive sexual behavior can cause many problems that affect both you and others. You may:Because the cause of compulsive sexual behavior isn't known, it's not clear how to prevent it. But a few things may help you keep control of problem behavior:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Set aside any shame or embarrassmentRemember that you're not aloneKeep in mind that what you say to a health care or mental health provider is private.Changes in brain pathways.An imbalance of natural brain chemicals.Conditions that affect the brain.How easy it is to get sexual content.Privacy.Struggle with feelings of guilt,Develop other mental health conditions,Neglect or lie to your partner and family,Lose your focus or engage in sexual activity or search internet pornography at work,Have financial problemsGet HIV, hepatitis or another sexually transmitted infection,Have problems with drugs and alcohol,Get arrestedGet help early for problems with sexual behavior.Seek treatment early for mental health conditions.Get help for problems with alcohol and drug use.Avoid risky situations.Advertising & Sponsorship