A concussion is a mild traumatic brain injury that affects brain function. Effects are often short term and can include headaches and trouble with concentration, memory, balance, mood and sleep.Concussions usually are caused by an impact to the head or body that is associated with a change in brain function. Not everyone who experiences a blow to the body or head has a concussion.Some concussions cause the person to lose consciousness, but most do not.Falls are the most common cause of concussions. Concussions also are common among athletes who play a contact sport, such as American football or soccer. Most people recover fully after a concussion.The symptoms of a concussion can be subtle and may not occur right away. Symptoms can last for days, weeks or even longer.Common symptoms after a mild traumatic brain injury are headache, confusion and loss of memory, known as amnesia. The amnesia usually involves forgetting the event that caused the concussion.Physical symptoms of a concussion may include:Other symptoms of a concussion include:A witness may observe these symptoms in the person with a concussion:Some symptoms of a concussion occur right away. But sometimes symptoms may not occur for days after the injury, such as:Concussions can be hard to recognize in infants and toddlers because they can't describe how they feel. Concussion clues may include:See a healthcare professional within 1 to 2 days if:Children and adolescents need to see a healthcare professional trained in evaluating and managing pediatric concussions.Seek emergency care for an adult or child who experiences a head injury and any of these symptoms:Never return to play or vigorous activity immediately following a concussion. Experts recommend that adult, child and adolescent athletes with concussions not return to play on the same day as the injury. Even if a concussion is suspected, experts recommend not returning to activities that can put the athlete at risk of another concussion. Gradual return to learning and physical activity is individual and depends on the symptoms. It should always be supervised by a healthcare professional.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesCommon injuries that cause concussions include falls or other direct hits to the head, car accidents, and blast injuries from explosions. These injuries can affect the brain in different ways and cause different types of concussions.During a concussion, the brain slides back and forth against the inner walls of the skull. This forceful movement can be caused by a violent blow to the head and neck or upper body. It also may be caused by the sudden acceleration or deceleration of the head. This may happen during a car crash, a fall from a bike or from a collision with another player in sports.These movements injure the brain and affect brain function, usually for a brief period of time. Sometimes a mild traumatic brain injury can lead to bleeding in or around the brain, causing prolonged drowsiness, confusion and, sometimes, death. Anyone who experiences a brain injury needs to be monitored in the hours afterward and seek emergency care if symptoms worsen.Events and factors that may increase the risk of a concussion include:Having had a previous concussion also increases the risk of having another.Potential complications of concussion include:These tips may help you prevent or minimize the risk of a concussion:Wear protective gear during sports and other recreational activities. Make sure the equipment fits properly, is well maintained and is worn correctly. Follow the rules of the game and practice good sportsmanship.Be sure to wear a helmet when bicycling, motorcycling, snowboarding or doing any activity that may result in a head injury.Concussion care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.See a healthcare professional within 1 to 2 days if:Seek emergency care for an adult or child who experiences a head injury and any of these symptoms:Post-traumatic headaches.Post-traumatic vertigo.Persistent post-concussive symptoms, also known as post-concussion syndrome.Effects of multiple brain injuries.Second impact syndrome.Wear protective gear during sports and other recreational activities.Buckle your seat belt.Make your home safe.Protect your children.Exercise regularly.Educate others about concussions.Advertising & Sponsorship