Mitral valve stenosis, shown in the heart on the right, is a condition in which the heart's mitral valve is narrowed. The valve doesn't open properly, blocking blood flow coming into the left ventricle, the main pumping chamber of the heart. A typical heart is shown on the left.The mitral valve separates the two chambers of the left side of the heart. In mitral valve prolapse, the valve flaps bulge into the upper left chamber during each heartbeat. Mitral valve prolapse can cause blood to leak backward, a condition called mitral valve regurgitation.Congenital mitral valve anomalies are problems with the valve between the heart's two left chambers. That valve is called the mitral valve. Congenital means it is present at birth.Mitral valve anomalies include:Types of heart valve disease caused by mitral valve anomalies include:You can have both mitral valve stenosis and mitral valve regurgitation.People with mitral valve anomalies also often have other heart problems present at birth.The health care provider does a physical exam and asks questions about your symptoms and your medical and family history. The provider listens to the heart with a stethoscope. A heart murmur may be heard. A heart murmur is a symptom of mitral valve disease.An echocardiogram is the main test used to diagnose congenital mitral valve anomalies. In an echocardiogram, sound waves create video images of the beating heart. An echocardiogram can show the structure of the heart and heart valves and blood flow through the heart.There are two types of echocardiograms. During a standard echocardiogram, the health care provider presses a device called a transducer firmly against the skin. Sound waves from the device go through the chest to the heart. The device records the sound wave echoes from the heart. A computer changes them into moving images. This test is also called a transthoracic ultrasound.Sometimes a standard echocardiogram doesn't give enough information. Your provider may recommend another test called a transesophageal echocardiogram. During this test, a flexible probe containing the transducer passes down the throat and into the tube connecting the mouth to the stomach (esophagus).Other tests, such as a chest X-ray or electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG), also may be done.Treatment depends on the symptoms and how severe the condition is. If you have congenital mitral valve anomalies, you should have regular health checkups.Some people may eventually need surgery to repair or replace the mitral valve.Mitral valve repair is done when possible, as it saves the heart valve. Surgeons may do one or more of the following during mitral valve repair:If the mitral valve can't be repaired, the valve may need to be replaced. In mitral valve replacement, a surgeon removes the damaged valve. It's replaced with a mechanical valve or a valve made from cow, pig or human heart tissue. The tissue valve is also called a biological tissue valve.Biological tissue valves wear down over time. They eventually need to be replaced. If you have a mechanical valve, you need blood thinners for life to prevent blood clots. Talk to your health care provider about the benefits and risks of each type of valve. The specific valve used is chosen by the cardiologist, surgeon and family after evaluating the risks and benefits.Sometime people need another valve repair or surgery to replace a valve that no longer works.People born with congenital mitral valve anomalies need lifelong health checkups. It's best to be cared for by a provider trained in congenital heart conditions. These types of providers are called pediatric and adult congenital cardiologists.Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Transplants support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.1606 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 15 Replies Fri, Jun 21, 2024 100 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Narrowing of the mitral valve, also called mitral valve stenosis.Leaky mitral valve, also called mitral valve regurgitation.Advertising & Sponsorship