A congenital heart defect is a problem with the structure of the heart that a child is born with.Some congenital heart defects in children are simple and don't need treatment. Others are more complex. The child may need several surgeries done over a period of several years.Learn more about CHD from pediatric cardiologist Jonathan Johnson, M.D.I'm Dr. Jonathan Johnson, a pediatric cardiologist at Mayo Clinic. In this video, we'll cover the basics of congenital heart disease in children. Whether you're looking for answers about your own child's health or that of someone you love, we're here to provide you with the best information available.Congenital heart disease, also called a defect, refers to one or more problems with the heart structure that are present at birth. These abnormalities occur when the heart or blood vessels don't form correctly in utero. At least eight out of every 1000 infants born in the US each year have a heart defect. That's 40,000 infants every year in this country. Congenital means that the problem was existing or present at birth. But sometimes defects can be identified even before birth. Sometimes they don't show signs until children are older or even into adulthood. Congenital heart disease can involve abnormalities in any of these structures, including the arteries, valves, chambers or the wall separating the chambers of the heart. These defects, depending on the severity and type, can affect the proper flow of blood and oxygen to the lungs and the body. There may be associated heart rhythm problems or the defects may cause the heart to work harder than it should. Some, like a small hole in the heart, can be very simple and cause very few problems with the child's development and health. But other cases, like when babies are born with parts of their hearts missing, require immediate care.Some congenital heart defects cause no signs or symptoms. Sometimes indications may only appear later in life. And symptoms can also return years after treatments. Symptoms for more serious forms of congenital heart defects may become evident in the first few days or months after birth. You may notice a pale gray or blue skin color called cyanosis. Babies use a lot of calories and effort when they're eating. Thus, eating often brings out symptoms of heart failure, such as rapid breathing or shortness of breath. Poor weight gain caused by the heart defect or by difficulty feeding due to symptoms while feeding, can be a sign of congenital heart disease. Some less serious conditions may not be diagnosed until later in childhood. Signs in older children can include becoming easily short of breath, easily tiring, or fainting during exercise or activity. They may also have swelling in the hands, the ankles and the feet. Your pediatrician may also hear an abnormal heartbeat or abnormal heart sound called a murmur during a checkup. Most of these murmurs are actually innocent, but it's important to check them out.Some congenital heart defects can be seen on an ultrasound while the baby is still in the womb. In certain extreme cases, treatment may be advised before a baby is even born. This may be done to correct the problem or reduce complications as the child continues to develop. In order to determine if your child has congenital heart disease, your doctor will do a physical exam and listen to their heart with a stethoscope. They'll ask about the child's symptoms and their medical history and any history of heart problems in their families. Then, if needed, they may advise other tests. A pulse oximetry measurement may be performed to estimate the amount of oxygen in the blood. This is a simple test done with a finger sensor. An electrocardiogram, or ECG, can be conducted to record the electrical signals in their heart. This is non-invasive and painless. Your doctor might want to schedule an echocardiogram, which uses sound waves to create an image of the heart. An echocardiogram allows the doctor to see the heart muscle and valves in motion and diagnoses most forms of congenital heart disease. They might be given a chest x-ray, which could reveal issues in the size and the shape of the heart. In some conditions, your doctor may order a cardiac MRI, which uses large magnets to take images of the heart in motion. Your doctor may ask for a cardiac catheterization. For this, a catheter or a small plastic tube placed via a needle into an artery or vein in your leg, arm or neck, and advanced into the different chambers of your heart. This way, doctors can check the blood flow and the pressure inside the heart chambers themselves. Today, doctors use cardiac catheterization methods to close certain kinds of holes in the heart or to place expandable valves.If your child has congenital heart disease, they will need care throughout their life. However, not every child with congenital heart disease requires active treatment and the defect may pose no harm to their health. Some defects, like a small hole in the heart, may resolve on their own. Some conditions can be treated with medications. These can include blood pressure medications, heart rhythm medications, and medications to help you get rid of excess water in your body. More serious forms of congenital heart diseases may require surgery or other procedures. This may be open-heart or a less invasive type of surgery. And, in cases where repairs aren't an option, a heart transplant may be needed. Doctors try to limit these interventions as much as possible and only recommend them if absolutely needed.It is important to familiarize yourself with your child's condition. Keep an eye out for worsening or new symptoms, and be aware of any lifestyle adjustments recommended by your cardiologist. As patients get older, it is crucial that they continue care with an adult-focused cardiologist with training in congenital heart disease. Finding out your child has a heart defect is scary and can be for them too, if they're old enough to understand it. But no matter when the diagnosis is made, progress in research and treatment have greatly increased not only survival rates, but overall quality of life for patients living with congenital heart disease. There's a great deal of hope for children with congenital heart disease. And we expect all to have happy childhoods that lead to long, full, productive lives. If you want to learn even more about congenital heart disease in children, watch our other related videos or visit mayoclinic.org. We wish you well.Serious congenital heart defects usually are found soon after birth or during the first few months of life. Symptoms could include:Less-serious congenital heart defects may not be found until later in childhood. Symptoms of congenital heart defects in older children may include:Serious congenital heart defects are often diagnosed before or soon after a child is born. If you think that your baby has symptoms of a heart condition, call your child's healthcare professional.A typical heart has two upper and two lower chambers. The upper chambers, the right and left atria, receive incoming blood. The lower chambers, the more muscular right and left ventricles, pump blood out of the heart. The heart valves help keep blood flowing in the right direction.To understand the causes of congenital heart defects, it may help to know how the heart usually works.The typical heart has four chambers. There are two on the right and two on the left.To pump blood through the body, the heart uses its left and right sides for different tasks.During the first six weeks of pregnancy, the baby's heart begins to form and starts to beat. The major blood vessels that go to and from the heart also begin to form during this critical time.It's at this point in a baby's development that congenital heart defects may begin to develop. Researchers aren't sure what causes most types of congenital heart defects. They think that gene changes, certain medicines or health conditions, and environmental or lifestyle factors, such as smoking, may play a role.There are many types of congenital heart defects. They fall into the general categories described below.Changes in connections, also called altered connections, let blood flow where it usually wouldn't.An altered connection can cause oxygen-poor blood to mix with oxygen-rich blood. This lowers the amount of oxygen sent through the body. The change in blood flow forces the heart and lungs to work harder.Types of altered connections in the heart or blood vessels include:Heart valves are like doorways between the heart chambers and the blood vessels. Heart valves open and close to keep blood moving in the proper direction. If the heart valves can't open and close correctly, blood can't flow smoothly.Heart valve problems include valves that are narrowed and don't open completely or valves that don't close completely.Examples of congenital heart valve problems include:Some infants are born with several congenital heart defects. Very complex ones may cause significant changes in blood flow or undeveloped heart chambers.Examples include:Most congenital heart defects result from changes that occur early as the baby's heart is developing before birth. The exact cause of most congenital heart defects is unknown. But some risk factors have been identified.Risk factors for congenital heart defects include:Possible complications of a congenital heart defect include:Complications of congenital heart defects may occur years after the heart condition is treated.Because the exact cause of most congenital heart defects is unknown, it may not be possible to prevent these conditions. If you have a high risk of giving birth to a child with a congenital heart defect, genetic testing and screening may be done during pregnancy.There are some steps you can take to help reduce your child's overall risk of heart problems present at birth such as:Congenital heart defects in children care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Transplants support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.1606 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 15 Replies Fri, Jun 21, 2024 100 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Atrial septal defectVentricular septal defectPatent ductus arteriosusTotal or partial anomalous pulmonary venous connectionAortic stenosis (stuh-NO-sis).Pulmonary stenosis.Ebstein anomaly.Tetralogy of Fallot (teh-TRAL-uh-jee of fuh-LOW).Pulmonary atresia.Tricuspid atresia.Transposition of the great arteries.Hypoplastic left heart syndrome.Rubella, also called German measles.Diabetes.Some medicines.Drinking alcohol during pregnancy.Smoking.Genetics.Congestive heart failure.Infection of the lining of the heart and heart valves,Irregular heartbeats, called arrhythmias.Slower growth and development (developmental delays).Stroke.Mental health disorders.Get proper prenatal care.Take a multivitamin with folic acid.Don't drink or smoke.Get a rubella vaccine.Control blood sugar.Manage chronic health conditions.Avoid harmful substances.Tell your care team about your medicines.Advertising & Sponsorship