Conjoined twins may be joined at one of several places. These conjoined twins are joined at the chest (thoracopagus). They have separate hearts but share other organs.Conjoined twins are two babies who are born physically connected to each other.Conjoined twins develop when an early embryo only partially separates to form two individuals. Although two babies develop from this embryo, they remain physically connected — most often at the chest, abdomen or pelvis. Conjoined twins may also share one or more internal body organs. Though many conjoined twins are not alive when born (stillborn) or die shortly after birth, advances in surgery and technology have improved survival rates. Some surviving conjoined twins can be surgically separated. The success of surgery depends on where the twins are joined and how many and which organs are shared. It also depends on the experience and skill of the surgical team.There are no specific symptoms that indicate a conjoined twin pregnancy. As with other twin pregnancies, the uterus may grow faster than it does with a single baby. And there may be more tiredness, nausea and vomiting early in the pregnancy. Conjoined twins can be diagnosed early in the pregnancy using an ultrasound.Conjoined twins are usually classified according to where they're joined. The twins sometimes share organs or other parts of their bodies. Each pair of conjoined twins is unique.Conjoined twins may be joined at any of these sites:In rare cases, twins may be conjoined with one twin smaller and less fully formed than the other (asymmetric conjoined twins). In extremely rare cases, one twin may be found partially developed within the other twin (fetus in fetu).Identical twins (monozygotic twins) occur when a single fertilized egg splits and develops into two individuals. Eight to 12 days after conception, the embryonic layers that split to form monozygotic twins begin to develop into specific organs and structures.It's believed that when the embryo splits later than this — usually between 13 and 15 days after conception — separation stops before the process is complete. The resulting twins are conjoined.An alternative theory suggests that two separate embryos may somehow fuse together in early development.What might cause either chain of events to occur is unknown.Because conjoined twins are so rare, and the cause isn't clear, it's unknown what might make some couples more likely to have conjoined twins.Pregnancy with conjoined twins is complex and greatly increases the risk of serious complications. Conjoined babies require surgical delivery by cesarean section (C-section).As with twins, conjoined babies are likely to be born prematurely, and one or both could be stillborn or die shortly after birth. Severe health issues for twins can occur immediately, such as trouble breathing or heart problems. Later in life, health issues such as scoliosis, cerebral palsy or learning disabilities may occur.Possible complications depend on where the twins are joined, which organs or other parts of the body they share, and the expertise and experience of the health care team. When conjoined twins are expected, the family and the health care team need to discuss in detail the possible complications and how to prepare for them.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Chest.Abdomen.Base of spine.Length of spine.Pelvis.Trunk.Head.Head and chest.Advertising & Sponsorship