Illustration of contact dermatitis on different skin colors. Contact dermatitis can appear as an itchy rash.Contact dermatitis is an itchy rash caused by direct contact with a substance or an allergic reaction to it. The rash isn't contagious, but it can be very uncomfortable.Many substances can cause this reaction, such as cosmetics, fragrances, jewelry and plants. The rash often shows up within days of exposure.To treat contact dermatitis successfully, you need to identify and avoid the cause of your reaction. If you avoid the substance causing the reaction, the rash often clears up in 2 to 4 weeks. You can try soothing your skin with a cool, wet cloth and other self-care steps.Contact dermatitis often affects skin directly exposed to an offending substance. Here, the rash is likely caused by cosmetics.Here, the blisters are caused by contact with the oily substance in poison ivy (urushiol) that causes allergic reactions.Contact dermatitis shows up on skin that has been directly exposed to the substance causing the reaction. For example, the rash may show up along a leg that brushed against poison ivy. The rash can develop within minutes to hours of exposure, and it can last 2 to 4 weeks.Signs and symptoms of contact dermatitis vary widely and may include:See your health care provider if:Seek immediate medical care in the following situations:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesContact dermatitis is caused by exposure to a substance that irritates your skin or triggers an allergic reaction. The substance could be one of thousands of known allergens and irritants. Often people have irritant and allergic reactions at the same time.Irritant contact dermatitis is the most common type. This nonallergic skin reaction occurs when an irritant damages your skin's outer protective layer.Some people react to strong irritants after a single exposure. Others may develop a rash after repeated exposures to even mild irritants, such as soap and water. And some people develop a tolerance to the substance over time.Common irritants include:Allergic contact dermatitis occurs when a substance to which you're sensitive (allergen) triggers an immune reaction in your skin. It often affects only the area that came into contact with the allergen. But it may be triggered by something that enters your body through foods, flavorings, medicine, or medical or dental procedures (systemic contact dermatitis).People often become sensitized to allergens after many contacts with it over years. Once you develop an allergy to a substance, even a small amount of it can cause a reaction.Common allergens include:Children develop allergic contact dermatitis from the usual offenders and also from exposure to diapers, baby wipes, jewelry used in ear piercing, clothing with snaps or dyes, and so on.The risk of contact dermatitis may be higher in people who have certain jobs and hobbies. Examples include:Contact dermatitis can lead to an infection if you repeatedly scratch the affected area, causing it to become wet and oozing. This creates a good place for bacteria or fungi to grow and may cause an infection.You can take the following steps to help prevent contact dermatitis:Vivien Williams: Hand-washing is essential for preventing the spread of germs. But, sometimes, all this scrubbing can cause a rash. Does this mean you're allergic to the soap?Dawn Davis, M.D., Dermatology, Mayo Clinic: One important thing to differentiate from allergic contact dermatitis is irritant contact dermatitis.Vivien Williams: Dr. Dawn Davis says allergic contact dermatitis means a substance is causing an allergic reaction on your skin. But irritant contact dermatitis means your skin is inflamed from repeated exposure to something.Dr. Davis: If I used lye soap on my skin, and I used it over and over again, I would develop an irritant contact dermatitis simply from eroding away the natural barrier of my skin with repetitive washing.Vivien Williams: Dr. Davis says it's not always easy to tell the difference between an allergy or irritant.Dr. Davis: So it's very helpful to go to a health provider, especially a dermatologist, to help differentiate between irritant contact dermatitisVivien Williams: and an allergy. That way you can properly treat the rash and prevent it from happening again.For the Mayo Clinic News Network, I'm Vivien Williams.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Seek immediate medical careIrritant contact dermatitisAllergic contact dermatitisAvoid irritants and allergens.Wash your skin.Wear protective clothing or gloves.Apply an iron-on patch to cover metal fasteners next to your skin.Apply a barrier cream or gel.Use moisturizer.Take care around pets.Vivien WilliamsDawn Davis, M.D., Dermatology, Mayo Clinic:Vivien WilliamsDr. Davis:Vivien WilliamsDr. Davis:Vivien WilliamsAdvertising & Sponsorship