Corns and calluses are thick, hardened layers of skin that develop when the skin tries to protect itself against friction or pressure. They often form on feet and toes or hands and fingers.If you're healthy, you don't need treatment for corns and calluses unless they cause pain or you don't like how they look. For most people, simply removing the source of the friction or pressure makes corns and calluses disappear.Corns have a hard center and tend to develop on the tops and sides of your toes. They can be painful.Calluses usually develop on the soles of the feet and palms of the hands. They can vary in size and shape and are rarely painful.Calluses often develop on the palms of the hands. They can vary in size and shape and are rarely painful. Playing instruments or using hand tools can cause calluses on the hands.Signs and symptoms of corns and calluses include:Corns and calluses are not the same thing.If a corn or callus becomes very painful or inflamed, see your health care provider. If you have diabetes or poor blood flow, seek medical care before self-treating a corn or callus. This is important because even a minor injury to your foot can lead to an infected open sore (ulcer).There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesCorns and calluses are caused by friction and pressure from repeated actions. Some sources of this friction and pressure include:Risk factors for corns and calluses include:If you have diabetes or another condition that causes poor blood flow to your feet, you're at greater risk of complications from corns and calluses.These approaches may help you prevent corns and calluses:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.CornsCallusesWearing ill-fitting shoes and socks.Skipping socks.Playing instruments or using hand tools.Inheriting a tendency to develop corns.Wear shoes that give your toes plenty of room.Use protective coverings.Wear padded gloves when using hand tools.Advertising & Sponsorship