Coronary artery disease (CAD) is a common type of heart disease. It affects the main blood vessels that supply blood to the heart, called the coronary arteries. In CAD, there is reduced blood flow to the heart muscle. A buildup of fats, cholesterol and other substances in and on the artery walls, a condition called atherosclerosis, usually causes coronary artery disease. The buildup, called plaque, makes the arteries narrow.Coronary artery disease often develops over many years. Symptoms are from the lack of blood flow to the heart. They may include chest pain and shortness of breath. A complete blockage of blood flow can cause a heart attack.Treatment for coronary artery disease may include medicines and surgery. Eating a nutritious diet, getting regular exercise and not smoking can help prevent coronary artery disease and the conditions that can cause it.Coronary artery disease also may be called coronary heart disease.Stephen Kopecky, M.D., talks about the risk factors, symptoms and treatment of coronary artery disease (CAD). Learn how lifestyle changes can lower your risk.{Music playing}Stephen Kopecky, M.D., Cardiovascular Disease, Mayo Clinic: I'm Dr. Stephen Kopecky, a cardiologist at Mayo Clinic. In this video, we'll cover the basics of coronary artery disease. What is it? Who gets it? The symptoms, diagnosis and treatment. Whether you're looking for answers for yourself or someone you love, we're here to give you the best information available.Coronary artery disease, also called CAD, is a condition that affects your heart. It is the most common heart disease in the United States. CAD happens when coronary arteries struggle to supply the heart with enough blood, oxygen and nutrients. Cholesterol deposits, or plaques, are almost always to blame. These buildups narrow your arteries, decreasing blood flow to your heart. This can cause chest pain, shortness of breath or even a heart attack. CAD typically takes a long time to develop. So often, patients don't know that they have it until there's a problem. But there are ways to prevent coronary artery disease, and ways to know if you're at risk and ways to treat it.Anyone can develop CAD. It begins when fats, cholesterols and other substances gather along the walls of your arteries. This process is called atherosclerosis. It's typically no cause for concern. However, too much buildup can lead to a blockage, obstructing blood flow. There are a number of risk factors, common red flags, that can contribute to this and ultimately lead to coronary artery disease. First, getting older can mean more damaged and narrowed arteries. Second, men are generally at a greater risk. But the risk for women increases after menopause. Existing health conditions matter, too. High blood pressure can thicken your arteries, narrowing your blood flow. High cholesterol levels can increase the rate of plaque buildup. Diabetes is also associated with higher risk, as is being overweight. Your lifestyle plays a large role as well. Physical inactivity, long periods of unrelieved stress in your life, an unhealthy diet and smoking can all increase your risk. And finally, family history. If a close relative was diagnosed at an early age with heart disease, you're at a greater risk. All these factors together can paint a picture of your risk for developing CAD.When coronary arteries become narrow, the heart doesn't get enough oxygen-rich blood. Remember, unlike most pumps, the heart has to pump its own energy supply. It's working harder with less. And you may begin to notice these signs and symptoms of pressure or tightness in your chest. This pain is called angina. It may feel like somebody is standing on your chest. When your heart can't pump enough blood to meet your body's needs, you might develop shortness of breath or extreme fatigue during activities. And if an artery becomes totally blocked, it leads to a heart attack. Classic signs and symptoms of a heart attack include crushing, substernal chest pain, pain in your shoulders or arms, shortness of breath, and sweating. However, many heart attacks have minimal or no symptoms and are found later during routine testing.Diagnosing CAD starts by talking to your doctor. They'll be able to look at your medical history, do a physical exam and order routine blood work. Depending on that, they may suggest one or more of the following tests: an electrocardiogram or ECG, an echocardiogram or soundwave test of the heart, stress test, cardiac catheterization and angiogram, or a cardiac CT scan.Treating coronary artery disease usually means making changes to your lifestyle. This might be eating healthier foods, exercising regularly, losing excess weight, reducing stress or quitting smoking. The good news is these changes can do a lot to improve your outlook. Living a healthier life translates to having healthier arteries. When necessary, treatment could involve drugs like aspirin, cholesterol-modifying medications, beta-blockers, or certain medical procedures like angioplasty or coronary artery bypass surgery.Discovering you have coronary artery disease can be overwhelming. But be encouraged. There are things you can do to manage and live with this condition. Reducing cholesterol, lowering blood pressure, quitting tobacco, eating healthier, exercising and managing your stress can make a world of difference. Better heart health starts by educating yourself. So don't be afraid to seek out information and ask your doctors about coronary artery disease. If you'd like to learn even more about this condition, watch our other related videos or visit Mayoclinic.org. We wish you well.Symptoms of coronary artery disease happen when the heart doesn't get enough oxygen-rich blood. Coronary artery disease symptoms may include:Symptoms of coronary artery disease may not be noticed at first. Sometimes symptoms only happen when the heart is beating hard, such as during exercise. As the coronary arteries continue to narrow, symptoms can get more severe or frequent.A completely blocked coronary artery will cause a heart attack. Common heart attack symptoms include:Chest pain is usually the most common symptom of heart attack. But for some people, such as women, the elderly and those with diabetes, symptoms may seem unrelated to a heart attack. For example, they may have nausea or a very brief pain in the neck or back. Some people having a heart attack don't notice symptoms.If you think you're having a heart attack, immediately call 911 or your local emergency number. If you don't have access to emergency medical services, have someone drive you to the nearest hospital. Drive yourself only as a last option.Smoking or having high blood pressure, high cholesterol, diabetes, obesity or a strong family history of heart disease makes you more likely to get coronary artery disease. If you're at high risk of coronary artery disease, talk to your healthcare professional. You may need tests to check for narrowed arteries and coronary artery disease.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesIf there's too much cholesterol in the blood, the cholesterol and other substances may form deposits called plaque. Plaque can cause an artery to become narrowed or blocked. If a plaque ruptures, a blood clot can form. Plaque and blood clots can reduce blood flow through an artery.Coronary artery disease is caused by the buildup of fats, cholesterol and other substances in and on the walls of the heart arteries. This condition is called atherosclerosis. The buildup is called plaque. Plaque can cause the arteries to narrow, blocking blood flow. The plaque also can burst, causing a blood clot.Some causes of atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease are:Coronary artery disease is common.Coronary artery disease risk factors you can't control include:Coronary artery disease risk factors you can control are:Risk factors often happen together. One risk factor may trigger another. When grouped together, some risk factors make you even more likely to develop coronary artery disease. For example, metabolic syndrome is a group of conditions that includes high blood pressure, high blood sugar, too much body fat around the waist and high triglyceride levels. Metabolic syndrome increases the risk of coronary artery disease.Other possible risk factors for coronary artery disease may include:Complications of coronary artery disease may include:Coronary artery disease care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart & Blood Health support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.346 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 58 Replies Thu, Jun 20, 2024 106 Replies Wed, Jun 19, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.{Music playing}Stephen Kopecky, M.D., Cardiovascular Disease, Mayo Clinic:Chest pain, called angina. Shortness of breath. FatigueAge.Birth sex.Family history.Smoking. High blood pressure. Cholesterol. Diabetes. Obesity.Chronic kidney disease.Not getting enough exercise. A lot of stressUnhealthy diet.Alcohol use.Amount of sleep. Breathing pauses during sleep, called obstructive sleep apnea. Increased high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP).High triglycerides. High levels of homocysteine. Preeclampsia. Other pregnancy complications. Certain autoimmune diseases. Chest pain, also called angina.Heart attack.Heart failure.Irregular heart rhythms, called arrhythmias.Advertising & Sponsorship