Corticobasal degeneration, also called corticobasal syndrome, is a rare disease that causes areas of the brain to shrink. Over time, nerve cells break down and die.Corticobasal degeneration affects the area of the brain that processes information and brain structures that control movement. People with this disease have trouble with movement on one or both sides of the body. Trouble with movement gets worse over time.Symptoms also may include poor coordination, stiffness, trouble thinking, and trouble with speech or language.Symptoms of corticobasal degeneration (corticobasal syndrome) include:Corticobasal degeneration gets worse over 6 to 8 years. Eventually, people with the disease lose the ability to walk.Corticobasal degeneration (corticobasal syndrome) can have several causes. Most commonly, the disease results from a buildup of a protein called tau in brain cells. The buildup of tau may lead to the breakdown of the cells. This can cause symptoms of corticobasal degeneration.Half of the people who have symptoms have corticobasal degeneration. But the second most common cause of corticobasal degeneration symptoms is Alzheimer's disease. Other causes of corticobasal degeneration include progressive supranuclear palsy, Pick's disease or Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.There are no known risk factors for corticobasal degeneration (corticobasal syndrome).People with corticobasal degeneration (corticobasal syndrome) may develop serious complications. People with the disease may develop pneumonia, blood clots in the lungs or a dangerous response to an infection, known as sepsis. Complications often lead to death.Corticobasal degeneration (corticobasal syndrome) care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship