Joints made of strong, fibrous tissue (cranial sutures) hold the bones of your baby's skull together. The sutures meet at the fontanels, the soft spots on your baby's head. The sutures remain flexible during infancy, allowing the skull to expand as the brain grows. The largest fontanel is at the front (anterior).Craniosynostosis (kray-nee-o-sin-os-TOE-sis) is a disorder present at birth in which one or more of the fibrous joints between the bones of your baby's skull (cranial sutures) close prematurely (fuse), before your baby's brain is fully formed. Brain growth continues, giving the head a misshapen appearance.Usually, during infancy the sutures remain flexible, allowing a baby's skull to expand as the brain grows. In the front of the skull, the sutures meet in the large soft spot (fontanel) on top of the head. The anterior fontanel is the soft spot felt just behind a baby's forehead. The next largest fontanel is at the back (posterior). Each side of the skull has a tiny fontanel.Craniosynostosis usually involves premature fusion of a single cranial suture, but it can involve more than one of the sutures in a baby's skull (multiple suture craniosynostosis). In rare cases, craniosynostosis is caused by certain genetic syndromes (syndromic craniosynostosis).Treating craniosynostosis involves surgery to correct the shape of the head and allow for brain growth. Early diagnosis and treatment allow your baby's brain adequate space to grow and develop.Although neurological damage can occur in severe cases, most children develop as expected in their ability to think and reason (cognitive development) and have good cosmetic results after surgery. Early diagnosis and treatment are key.The signs of craniosynostosis are usually noticeable at birth, but they become more apparent during the first few months of your baby's life. Signs and severity depend on how many sutures are fused and when in brain development the fusion occurs. Signs and symptoms can include:There are several types of craniosynostosis. Most involve the fusion of a single cranial suture. Some complex forms of craniosynostosis involve the fusion of multiple sutures. Multiple suture craniosynostosis is usually linked to genetic syndromes and is called syndromic craniosynostosis.The term given to each type of craniosynostosis depends on what sutures are affected. Types of craniosynostosis include:A misshapen head doesn't always indicate craniosynostosis. For example, if the back of your baby's head appears flattened, it could be the result of spending too much time lying on one side of the head. This can be treated with regular position changes, or if significant, with helmet therapy (cranial orthosis) to help reshape the head to a more balanced appearance.Your health care provider will routinely monitor your child's head growth at well-child visits. Talk to your pediatrician if you have concerns about your baby's head growth or shape.Often the cause of craniosynostosis is not known, but sometimes it's related to genetic disorders.If untreated, craniosynostosis may cause, for example:The risk of increased pressure inside the skull (intracranial pressure) from simple craniosynostosis is small if the suture and head shape are fixed surgically. But babies with an underlying syndrome may develop increased intracranial pressure if their skulls don't expand enough to make room for their growing brains.If untreated, increased intracranial pressure can cause:Craniosynostosis care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Sagittal (scaphocephaly).Coronal.Metopic.Lambdoid.Nonsyndromic craniosynostosisSyndromic craniosynostosisAdvertising & Sponsorship