The pituitary gland and the hypothalamus are in the brain. They control hormone production.Craniopharyngioma is a rare type of noncancerous brain tumor.Craniopharyngioma begins as a growth of cells near the brain's pituitary gland. The pituitary gland makes hormones that control many body functions. As a craniopharyngioma slowly grows, it can affect the pituitary gland and other nearby structures in the brain.Craniopharyngioma can happen at any age, but it occurs most often in children and older adults. Symptoms include changes in vision over time, fatigue, headaches and urinating more often. Children with craniopharyngioma may grow slowly and may be smaller than expected.Diagnosing a craniopharyngioma usually starts with a medical history review and a discussion of symptoms. Tests used to diagnose a craniopharyngioma include:Craniopharyngioma treatment often starts with surgery. When possible, surgeons remove all of the tumor. Sometimes the craniopharyngioma can't be removed completely. Surgeons may remove as much of the craniopharyngioma as is safe.Radiation therapy may be used after surgery to treat any tumor cells that remain. Using surgery and radiation together often provides good tumor control. This approach also helps lower the risk of complications after surgery.Other treatments, such as chemotherapy and targeted therapy, might be options in certain situations.Most people with craniopharyngioma have surgery to remove all or most of the tumor. What type of surgery you have depends on the location and size of the tumor.When possible, surgeons remove the entire tumor. However, there are often many delicate and important structures nearby. This means surgeons sometimes can't remove the entire tumor. To ensure a good quality of life after the operation, surgeons remove as much of the tumor as possible. Other treatments may be used after surgery.Surgeons do the operation in a way that avoids hurting nearby structures during the operation. Surgeons take care to reduce the risk of vision problems. They work to minimize damage to the hypothalamus. The hypothalamus helps with many functions, including controlling appetite and alertness.Surgery is sometimes used to relieve a fluid backup on the brain, called hydrocephalus. A tube can be placed to drain the fluid. Often the tube is temporary. Sometimes a permanent tube is needed. A permanent tube, called a shunt, can drain the brain fluid to the abdomen.Radiation therapy uses powerful energy beams to control tumor cells. The energy can come from X-rays, protons or other sources.Radiation therapy is often used after surgery to treat any tumor cells that are left.Types of radiation therapy for craniopharyngioma include:External beam radiation therapy. During external beam radiation therapy, you lie on a table while a machine moves around you. The machine directs radiation to precise points on your body.Specialized external beam radiation technology allows your health care team to carefully shape and aim the radiation beam. This helps to deliver treatment to the tumor cells and reduces the chances of hurting healthy tissue. These technologies include proton beam therapy and intensity-modulated radiation therapy, also called IMRT.Chemotherapy uses medicines to kill tumor cells. Chemotherapy can be injected directly into the tumor so that the treatment reaches the target cells. This makes it less likely to damage nearby healthy tissue.Targeted therapy medicines might be a treatment option for one type of craniopharyngioma called papillary craniopharyngioma. This type isn't common. In adults, about one out of every three craniopharyngiomas is the papillary type.Targeted therapy uses medicines that attack specific chemicals in the tumor cells. By blocking these chemicals, targeted treatments can cause tumor cells to die.Nearly all papillary craniopharyngioma cells contain a change in their DNA called the BRAF gene. Targeted therapy aimed at this change may be a treatment option. Lab testing can show whether your craniopharyngioma contains papillary cells. Tests also can tell whether those cells have the BRAF gene change.Clinical trials are studies of new treatments. These studies provide a chance to try the latest treatments. The risk of side effects might not be known. Ask your health care team if you might be able to be in a clinical trial.Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Brain Tumor support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.172 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 1 Replies Tue, Jun 04, 2024 6 Replies Sun, May 26, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Neurological exam.Blood tests.Imaging tests.Open craniopharyngioma surgery.Minimally invasive craniopharyngioma surgery.External beam radiation therapy.Stereotactic radiosurgery.Brachytherapy.Advertising & Sponsorship