Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) surrounds the brain and spinal cord and provides a cushion to protect them from injury. There are three layers that surround the spinal cord and brain. When there is a hole or tear in the outermost layer, a CSF leak occurs. The hole or tear in this outer layer, called the dura mater, allows some of the fluid to escape.There are two distinct types of CSF leaks: spinal CSF leaks and cranial CSF leaks. Each type has different symptoms, causes and treatments.A spinal CSF leak occurs anywhere in the spinal column. The most common symptom of a spinal CSF leak is a headache.A cranial CSF leak occurs in the skull, and often causes symptoms such as clear fluid leaking from the nose or ear.Some CSF leaks may heal with bed rest and other conservative treatment. Many CSF leaks need a patch to cover the hole or surgery to repair the leak.Symptoms vary between spinal and cranial CSF leaks.The most common symptom of a spinal CSF leak is a headache. These headaches usually:Other symptoms of spinal CSF leaks may include:Cranial CSF leak symptoms may include:Spinal CSF leaks may be caused by:Cranial CSF leaks may be caused by:Sometimes CSF leaks develop after very minor events:When there is no surgery or procedure prior to the start of a CSF leak, it is called a spontaneous CSF leak.Risk factors for spinal CSF leaks include:Risk factors for cranial CSF leaks include:If a cranial CSF leak is left untreated, complications may occur. Possible complications include meningitis and tension pneumocephalus, which is when air enters the spaces surrounding the brain. Untreated spinal CSF leaks may lead to subdural hematomas, or bleeding on the surface of the brain.CSF leak (Cerebrospinal fluid leak) care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship