Delayed ejaculation is a condition in which it takes a long period of sexual arousal to reach climax and release semen from the penis, called ejaculate. Some people with delayed ejaculation can't ejaculate at all.Delayed ejaculation can be a brief or lifelong problem. Possible causes of delayed ejaculation include certain ongoing health conditions, surgeries and medicines. Treatment for delayed ejaculation depends on the cause.Delayed ejaculation can happen from time to time. Delayed ejaculation is a problem only if it's ongoing and causes stress or worry for you and your partner.There's no set time that means a diagnosis of delayed ejaculation. Some people with delayed ejaculation need many minutes of sexual stimulation to have an orgasm and ejaculate. Others might not be able to ejaculate at all, called anejaculation.In delayed ejaculation, the delay causes upset. Also delayed ejaculation might mean stopping sex due to tiredness, physical irritation, loss of erection or because the partner wants to stop.Often, there's trouble reaching orgasm during sexual intercourse or other sexual activities with a partner. Some people can ejaculate only when masturbating. But others may not be able to ejaculate by masturbating.Delayed ejaculation is divided into the following types based on symptoms:Your main healthcare professional is a good place to start when you have delayed ejaculation. See your healthcare professional if:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesSome medicines, certain ongoing health conditions and surgeries can cause delayed ejaculation. Other causes include substance misuse or a mental health concern, such as depression, anxiety or stress. Often, it's due to a mix of physical and psychological concerns.Psychological causes of delayed ejaculation include:Medicines and other substances that can cause delayed ejaculation include:Physical causes of delayed ejaculation include:The following can increase the risk of having delayed ejaculation:Complications of delayed ejaculation can include:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Lifelong versus acquired.Generalized versus situational.Advertising & Sponsorship