Dementia is a term used to describe a group of symptoms affecting memory, thinking and social abilities. In people who have dementia, the symptoms interfere with their daily lives. Dementia isn't one specific disease. Several diseases can cause dementia.Dementia generally involves memory loss. It's often one of the early symptoms of the condition. But having memory loss alone doesn't mean you have dementia. Memory loss can have different causes.Alzheimer's disease is the most common cause of dementia in older adults, but there are other causes of dementia. Depending on the cause, some dementia symptoms might be reversible.Dementia symptoms vary depending on the cause. Common symptoms include:See a health care professional if you or a loved one has memory problems or other dementia symptoms. It's important to determine the cause. Some medical conditions that cause dementia symptoms can be treated.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesDementia is caused by damage to or loss of nerve cells and their connections in the brain. The symptoms depend on the area of the brain that's damaged. Dementia can affect people differently.Dementias are often grouped by what they have in common. They may be grouped by the protein or proteins deposited in the brain or by the part of the brain that's affected. Also, some diseases have symptoms like those of dementia. And some medicines can cause a reaction that includes dementia symptoms. Not getting enough of certain vitamins or minerals also can cause dementia symptoms. When this occurs, dementia symptoms may improve with treatment.Dementias that are progressive get worse over time. Types of dementias that worsen and aren't reversible include:Alzheimer's disease. This is the most common cause of dementia.Although not all causes of Alzheimer's disease are known, experts do know that a small percentage are related to changes in three genes. These gene changes can be passed down from parent to child. While several genes are probably involved in Alzheimer's disease, one important gene that increases risk is apolipoprotein E4 (APOE).People with Alzheimer's disease have plaques and tangles in their brains. Plaques are clumps of a protein called beta-amyloid. Tangles are fibrous masses made up of tau protein. It's thought that these clumps damage healthy brain cells and the fibers connecting them.Vascular dementia. This type of dementia is caused by damage to the vessels that supply blood to the brain. Blood vessel problems can cause stroke or affect the brain in other ways, such as by damaging the fibers in the white matter of the brain.The most common symptoms of vascular dementia include problems with problem-solving, slowed thinking, and loss of focus and organization. These tend to be more noticeable than memory loss.Lewy body dementia. Lewy bodies are balloonlike clumps of protein. They have been found in the brains of people with Lewy body dementia, Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease. Lewy body dementia is one of the more common types of dementia.Common symptoms include acting out dreams in sleep and seeing things that aren't there, known as visual hallucinations. Symptoms also include problems with focus and attention. Other signs include uncoordinated or slow movement, tremors, and stiffness, known as parkinsonism.Traumatic brain injury (TBI). This condition is most often caused by repetitive head trauma. Boxers, football players or soldiers might develop TBI.Dementia symptoms depend on the part of the brain that's injured. TBI can cause depression, explosiveness, memory loss and impaired speech. TBI also may cause slow movement, tremors and stiffness. Symptoms might not appear until years after the trauma.Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. This rare brain disorder usually occurs in people without known risk factors. This condition might be due to deposits of infectious proteins called prions. Symptoms of this fatal condition usually appear after age 60.Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease usually has no known cause but it can be passed down from a parent. It also may be caused by exposure to diseased brain or nervous system tissue, such as from a cornea transplant.Some causes of dementia-like symptoms can be reversed with treatment. They include:Many factors can eventually contribute to dementia. Some factors, such as age, can't be changed. You can address other factors to reduce your risk.You might be able to control the following risk factors for dementia.Medicines that can worsen memory. These include sleep aids that contain diphenhydramine (Benadryl) and medicines to treat urinary urgency such as oxybutynin (Ditropan XL).Also limit sedatives and sleeping tablets. Talk to a health care professional about whether any of the medicines you take might make your memory worse.Dementia can affect many body systems and, therefore, the ability to function. Dementia can lead to:There's no sure way to prevent dementia, but there are steps you can take that might help. More research is needed, but it might be beneficial to do the following:Get enough vitamins. Some research suggests that people with low levels of vitamin D in their blood are more likely to develop Alzheimer's disease and other forms of dementia. You can increase your vitamin D levels with certain foods, supplements and sun exposure.More study is needed before an increase in vitamin D intake is recommended for preventing dementia. But it's a good idea to make sure you get adequate vitamin D. Taking a daily B-complex vitamin and vitamin C also might help.Manage cardiovascular risk factors. Treat high blood pressure, high cholesterol and diabetes. Lose weight if you're overweight.High blood pressure might lead to a higher risk of some types of dementia. More research is needed to determine whether treating high blood pressure may reduce the risk of dementia.Dementia care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Alzheimer's disease.Vascular dementia.Lewy body dementia.Frontotemporal dementia.Mixed dementia.Huntington's disease.Traumatic brain injury (TBI).Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.Parkinson's disease.Infections and immune disorders.Metabolic or endocrine problems.Low levels of certain nutrients.Medicine side effects.Subdural bleeding.Brain tumors.Normal-pressure hydrocephalus.Age.Family history.Down syndrome.Diet and exercise.Drinking too much alcohol.Cardiovascular risk factors.Depression.Air pollution.Head trauma.Sleep problems.Low levels of certain vitamins and nutrients.Medicines that can worsen memory.Poor nutrition.Pneumonia.Inability to perform self-care tasks.Personal safety challenges.Death.Keep your mind active.Be physically and socially active.Quit smoking.Get enough vitamins.Manage cardiovascular risk factors.Treat health conditions.Maintain a healthy diet.Get good-quality sleep.Treat hearing problems.Advertising & Sponsorship