Depersonalization-derealization disorder occurs when you always or often feel that you're seeing yourself from outside your body or you sense that things around you are not real — or both. Feelings of depersonalization and derealization can be very disturbing. You may feel like you're living in a dream.Many people have a passing experience of depersonalization or derealization at some point. But when these feelings keep occurring or never fully go away, and they make it hard for you to function, it's likely depersonalization-derealization disorder. This condition is more common in people who experience trauma, such as violence, abuse or other kinds of extreme stress.Depersonalization-derealization disorder can be serious and may get in the way of your relationships and work. It also can disrupt other daily activities. The main treatment for depersonalization-derealization disorder is psychotherapy, also known as talk therapy. Sometimes medicines also are used.Short experiences of depersonalization or derealization are fairly common. But lasting and returning bouts of these symptoms can cause problems at work or school, or in other important areas of your life. During these bouts, you know that your sense of not being connected to your body or your surroundings are only feelings and not reality.The experience and feelings of the condition can be hard to describe. Worrying about "going crazy" can cause you to become focused on checking that you exist and finding out what's real.Symptoms usually begin in the middle or late teenage years, or in early adulthood. Depersonalization-derealization disorder is rare in children and older adults.Symptoms of depersonalization include:Symptoms of derealization include:Bouts of depersonalization-derealization disorder may last hours, days, weeks or months. In some people, these bouts turn into ongoing feelings of depersonalization or derealization that may get better or worse at times.Passing feelings of depersonalization or derealization are common and are not always a cause for concern. But ongoing or serious feelings of detachment and distortion of your surroundings can be a sign of depersonalization-derealization disorder or another physical or mental health condition.See a doctor if you have feelings of depersonalization or derealization that:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe cause of depersonalization-derealization disorder is not well understood. Some people may be more likely to experience depersonalization and derealization than others. This is possibly due to genetic and environmental factors. High levels of stress and fear may cause bouts.Symptoms of depersonalization-derealization disorder may be related to childhood trauma or other experiences or events that cause severe emotional stress or trauma.Factors that may raise the risk of depersonalization-derealization disorder include:Bouts of depersonalization or derealization can be scary and make it hard to function. They can:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Certain personality traitsSerious traumaSerious stress,Depression or anxiety,Drug misuse,Advertising & Sponsorship