Dermatographia is a condition in which lightly scratching your skin causes raised, inflamed lines where you've scratched. Though not serious, it can be uncomfortable.Dermatographia is a condition in which lightly scratching your skin causes raised, inflamed lines or welts. These marks tend to go away in less than 30 minutes. The condition is also known as dermatographism and skin writing.The cause of dermatographia is unknown, but it may be related to an infection, emotional upset or a medicine you're taking.Dermatographia is harmless. Most people who have this condition don't need treatment. If your symptoms bother you, talk with your health care provider, who might prescribe an allergy medicine.Symptoms of dermatographia may include:The symptoms may occur within a few minutes of the skin being rubbed or scratched. They tend to go away within 30 minutes. Rarely, the skin symptoms develop more slowly and lasts several hours to days. The condition itself can last for months or years.See your health care provider if your symptoms bother you.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe exact cause of dermatographia isn't clear. It may be an allergic reaction, though no specific allergen has been found.Simple things may cause symptoms of dermatographia. For example, rubbing from your clothes or bedsheets may irritate your skin. In some people, the symptoms are preceded by an infection, emotional stress, vibration, cold exposure or taking a medicine.Dermatographia can occur at any age. It tends to be more common in teens and young adults. If you have other skin conditions, you may be at greater risk. One such condition is atopic dermatitis (eczema).Try these tips to reduce discomfort and prevent the symptoms of dermatographia:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Treat skin gently.Don't scratch your skin.Keep your skin moisturized.Advertising & Sponsorship