Dermatitis is a common condition that causes swelling and irritation of the skin. It has many causes and forms and often involves itchy, dry skin or a rash. Or it might cause the skin to blister, ooze, crust or flake. Three common types of this condition are atopic dermatitis, contact dermatitis and seborrheic dermatitis. Atopic dermatitis is also known as eczema.Dermatitis isn't contagious, but it can be very uncomfortable. Moisturizing regularly helps control the symptoms. Treatment also may include medicated ointments, creams and shampoos.Illustration of contact dermatitis on different skin colors. Contact dermatitis can appear as an itchy rash.Each type of dermatitis tends to occur on a different part of the body. Symptoms may include:See your doctor if:Seek immediate medical attention if you have a fever and the rash looks infected.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesJason T. Howland: Atopic dermatitis is a sensitivity disease of the skin, similar to asthma in the lungs, hay fever in the sinuses and food allergies in the gut.Dawn Marie R. Davis, M.D.: It's a multisystem disorder. Inflammation affects the skin, and the skin is more sensitive than usual.Howland: It's a chronic condition and tends to flare periodically. The symptoms vary.Dr. Davis: Atopic dermatitis tends to be red, weepy, crusty, itchy, flaky patches, like oval or circular-shaped areas on the skin.Our skin is like a brick wall. And over time as we age, or genetically if we are predisposed to sensitive skin, it can look like a wicker basket more than a brick wall.Howland: Adult eczema often occurs in patches on areas of the body prone to friction or sweat.Dr. Davis: Where your waistband would sit, where your socks or shoes would rub. If you have a watch, where you would wear your watch. If you have a headband or certain things that you wear along your neck, like a necklace or a tie.It's important to bathe regularly. It's important to hydrate the skin with a moisturizer that is hypoallergenic. It's important to monitor for infection.Howland: If those self-care steps don't help, your dermatologist may prescribe topical or oral medications, or other therapies.For Mayo Clinic News Network, I'm Jason Howland.Ally Barons: I just have always grown up around water, and I love to swim.Vivien Williams: But last year, during spring break, lifeguard Ally Barons developed a strange, long, red mark on her leg after a dip in the ocean.Ally Barons: But then it started to get really red and blistered.Vivien Williams: She thought maybe it was a jellyfish sting. Mayo Clinic Dr. Dawn Davis told Ally yes, it was a sting, but from a plant and the sun, not a jellyfish.Ally Barons: So I was kind of disappointed because jellyfish sounds cooler.Dawn Marie R. Davis, M.D.: There are certain plants and fruits in nature, such as dill, buttercup, bergamot, musk ambrette, parsley, parsnip, and citrus fruits, especially lime, that when these chemicals that they contain hit your skin and then it's exposed to ultraviolet light, a chemical reaction occurs. And you can either develop a dermatitis, which is called phytophotodermatitis, plant-light induced eczema, or you can develop a phototoxic dermatitis, meaning plant sunburn dermatitis.Vivien Williams: Typical scenarios would be when you brush up against certain plants on a hike or when you squeeze a lime into a drink, maybe you get some juice on your hands, you touch your arm. And when the sun hits that spot, the dermatitis appears in the form of hand prints or drips.Dawn Marie R. Davis, M.D.: A lot of people think that it's poison ivy with the lines and the streaks. But it's, indeed, not. It's a phytophotodermatitis.Vivien Williams: Treatment includes topical ointment and staying out of the sun.Ally Barons: It's right here on my leg.Vivien Williams: Ally says her reaction was a bit painful, but over time it's fading away. For Medical Edge, I'm Vivien Williams.A common cause of dermatitis is contact with something that irritates your skin or triggers an allergic reaction. Examples of such things are poison ivy, perfume, lotion and jewelry containing nickel. Other causes of dermatitis include dry skin, a viral infection, bacteria, stress, genetic makeup and a problem with the immune system.Common risk factors for dermatitis include:Repeated scratching that breaks the skin can cause open sores and cracks. These increase the risk of infection from bacteria and fungi. These skin infections can spread and become life-threatening, though this is rare.In people with brown and Black skin, dermatitis might cause the affected skin to darken or lighten. These conditions are called post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation and post-inflammatory hypopigmentation. It might take months or years for the skin to return to its usual color.Wear protective clothing if you're doing a task that involves irritants or caustic chemicals.Developing a basic skin care routine also may help prevent dermatitis. The following habits can help reduce the drying effects of bathing:Moisturize all the skin. While the skin is still damp, seal in moisture with an oil, cream or lotion. Moisturize throughout the day as needed.Many moisturizers are sold. Try different products to find one that works for you. The ideal moisturizer is safe, unscented, effective, affordable and one that you like to use regularly. Examples include Vanicream, Eucerin, CeraVe and Cetaphil.Dermatitis care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Seek immediate medical attention ifJason T. Howland:Dawn Marie R. Davis, M.D.:Howland:Dr. Davis:Howland:Dr. Davis:Howland:Ally Barons:Vivien Williams:Ally Barons:Vivien Williams:Ally Barons:Dawn Marie R. Davis, M.D.:Vivien Williams:Dawn Marie R. Davis, M.D.:Vivien Williams:Ally Barons:Vivien Williams:Age.Allergies, atopic dermatitis and asthma.Occupation.Other health conditions.Take shorter baths and showers.Use a mild soap or a soapless cleanser.Pat dry.Moisturize all the skin.Advertising & Sponsorship