Desmoid tumors are noncancerous growths that occur in the connective tissue. Desmoid tumors most often occur in the abdomen, arms and legs.Another term for desmoid tumors is aggressive fibromatosis.Some desmoid tumors are slow growing and don't require immediate treatment. Others grow quickly and are treated with surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy or other drugs.Desmoid tumors aren't considered cancers because they don't spread to other areas of the body. But they can be very aggressive, acting more like cancers and growing into nearby structures and organs. For this reason, people with desmoid tumors are often cared for by cancer doctors.Desmoid tumor symptoms differ based on where the tumors occur. Desmoid tumors most often happen in the abdomen, arms and legs. But they can form anywhere in the body.In general, signs and symptoms include:Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs or symptoms that worry you.It's not clear what causes desmoid tumors.Doctors know these tumors form when a connective tissue cell develops changes in its DNA. A cell's DNA contains the instructions that tell a cell what to do. The changes tell the connective tissue cell to multiply rapidly, creating a mass of cells (tumor) that can invade and destroy healthy body tissue.Factors that may increase the risk of desmoid tumors include:Desmoid tumors care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Cancer support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.190 Replies Tue, Jun 25, 2024 121 Replies Tue, Jun 25, 2024 57 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Young adult age.A genetic syndrome that causes many colon polyps.Pregnancy.Injury.Advertising & Sponsorship