A deviated septum occurs when the thin wall (nasal septum) between your nasal passages is displaced to one side. In many people, the nasal septum is off-center — or deviated — making one nasal passage smaller. A deviated septum occurs when your nasal septum is significantly displaced to one side, making one nasal air passage smaller than the other. When a deviated septum is severe, it can block one side of the nose and reduce airflow, causing difficulty breathing. The exposure of a deviated septum to the drying effect of airflow through the nose may sometimes contribute to crusting or bleeding in certain people.A nasal blockage or congestion (obstruction) can occur from a deviated nasal septum, from swelling of the tissues lining the nose or from both.Treatment of nasal obstruction may include medications to reduce the swelling. To correct a deviated septum, you'll need surgery.Most septal displacements result in no symptoms, and you may not even know you have a deviated septum. Some septal deformities, however, may cause the following signs and symptoms:See your doctor if you experience:A deviated septum occurs when your nasal septum — the thin wall that separates your right and left nasal passages — is displaced to one side.A deviated septum can be caused by:Injury to the nose. A deviated septum can also be the result of an injury that causes the nasal septum to be moved out of position.In infants, such an injury may occur during childbirth. In children and adults, a wide array of accidents may lead to a nose injury and deviated septum. Trauma to the nose most commonly occurs during contact sports, rough play such as wrestling or automobile accidents.The aging process may affect nasal structures, worsening a deviated septum over time.Swelling and irritation of the nasal cavities or sinus cavities because of an infection can further narrow the nasal passage and result in nasal obstruction.For some people, a deviated septum is present at birth — occurring during fetal development or due to injury during childbirth. After birth, a deviated septum is most commonly caused by an injury that moves your nasal septum out of place. Risk factors include:A severely deviated septum causing nasal blockage can lead to:You may be able to prevent the injuries to your nose that can cause a deviated septum with these precautions:Sep 14, 2021CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.