Diabetic ketoacidosis is a serious complication of diabetes.The condition develops when the body can't produce enough insulin. Insulin plays a key role in helping sugar — a major source of energy for muscles and other tissues — enter cells in the body.Without enough insulin, the body begins to break down fat as fuel. This causes a buildup of acids in the bloodstream called ketones. If it's left untreated, the buildup can lead to diabetic ketoacidosis.If you have diabetes or you're at risk of diabetes, learn the warning signs of diabetic ketoacidosis and when to seek emergency care.Diabetic ketoacidosis symptoms often come on quickly, sometimes within 24 hours. For some, these symptoms may be the first sign of having diabetes. Symptoms might include:More-certain signs of diabetic ketoacidosis — which can show up in home blood and urine test kits — include:If you feel ill or stressed or you've had a recent illness or injury, check your blood sugar level often. You might also try a urine ketone test kit you can get at a drugstore.Contact your health care provider right away if:Seek emergency care if:Remember, untreated diabetic ketoacidosis can lead to death.Sugar is a main source of energy for the cells that make up muscles and other tissues. Insulin helps sugar enter the cells in the body.Without enough insulin, the body can't use sugar to make the energy it needs. This causes the release of hormones that break down fat for the body to use as fuel. This also produces acids known as ketones. Ketones build up in the blood and eventually spill over into the urine.Diabetic ketoacidosis usually happens after:Other things that can lead to diabetic ketoacidosis include:The risk of diabetic ketoacidosis is highest if you:Sometimes, diabetic ketoacidosis can occur with type 2 diabetes. In some cases, diabetic ketoacidosis may be the first sign of having diabetes.Diabetic ketoacidosis is treated with fluids, electrolytes — such as sodium, potassium and chloride — and insulin. Perhaps surprisingly, the most common complications of diabetic ketoacidosis are related to this lifesaving treatment.Treatment complications include:Untreated, diabetic ketoacidosis can lead to loss of consciousness and, eventually, death.There are many ways to prevent diabetic ketoacidosis and other diabetes complications.Diabetes complications are scary. But don't let fear keep you from taking good care of yourself. Follow your diabetes treatment plan carefully. Ask your diabetes treatment team for help when you need it.Oct 06, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.