Diabetic nephropathy is a serious complication of type 1 diabetes and type 2 diabetes. It's also called diabetic kidney disease. In the United States, about 1 in 3 people living with diabetes have diabetic nephropathy.Diabetic nephropathy affects the kidneys' usual work of removing waste products and extra fluid from the body. The best way to prevent or delay diabetic nephropathy is by living a healthy lifestyle and keeping diabetes and high blood pressure managed.Over years, diabetic nephropathy slowly damages the kidneys' filtering system. Early treatment may prevent this condition or slow it and lower the chance of complications.Diabetic kidney disease can lead to kidney failure. This also is called end-stage kidney disease. Kidney failure is a life-threatening condition. Treatment options for kidney failure are dialysis or a kidney transplant.One of the important jobs of the kidneys is to clean the blood. As blood moves through the body, it picks up extra fluid, chemicals and waste. The kidneys separate this material from the blood. It's carried out of the body in urine. If the kidneys are unable to do this and the condition is untreated, serious health problems result, with eventual loss of life.In the early stages of diabetic nephropathy, there might not be symptoms. In later stages, symptoms may include:Make an appointment with your health care professional if you have symptoms of kidney disease. If you have diabetes, visit your health care professional yearly or as often as you're told for tests that measure how well your kidneys are working.Diabetic nephropathy happens when diabetes damages blood vessels and other cells in the kidneys.A typical kidney has about 1 million filtering units. Each unit, called a glomerulus, joins a tubule. The tubule collects urine. Conditions such as high blood pressure and diabetes harm kidney function by damaging these filtering units and tubules. The damage causes scarring.The kidneys remove waste and extra fluid from the blood through filtering units called nephrons. Each nephron contains a filter, called a glomerulus. Each filter has tiny blood vessels called capillaries. When blood flows into a glomerulus, tiny bits, called molecules, of water, minerals and nutrients, and wastes pass through the capillary walls. Large molecules, such as proteins and red blood cells, do not. The part that's filtered then passes into another part of the nephron called the tubule. The water, nutrients and minerals the body needs are sent back to the bloodstream. The extra water and waste become urine that flows to the bladder.The kidneys have millions of tiny blood vessel clusters called glomeruli. Glomeruli filter waste from the blood. Damage to these blood vessels can lead to diabetic nephropathy. The damage can keep the kidneys from working as they should and lead to kidney failure.Diabetic nephropathy is a common complication of type 1 and type 2 diabetes.Over time, diabetes that isn't well controlled can damage blood vessels in the kidneys that filter waste from the blood. This can lead to kidney damage and cause high blood pressure.High blood pressure can cause more kidney damage by raising the pressure in the filtering system of the kidneys.If you have diabetes, the following can raise your risk of diabetic nephropathy:Complications of diabetic nephropathy can come on slowly over months or years. They may include:To lower your risk of developing diabetic nephropathy:Diabetic nephropathy (kidney disease) care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Transplants support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.1606 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 15 Replies Fri, Jun 21, 2024 100 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.See your health care team regularly to manage diabetes.Treat your diabetes.Manage high blood pressure or other medical conditions.Take medicines you get without a prescription only as directed.Stay at a healthy weight.Don't smoke.Advertising & Sponsorship