Diabetic hypoglycemia occurs when someone with diabetes doesn't have enough sugar (glucose) in his or her blood. Glucose is the main source of fuel for the body and brain, so you can't function well if you don't have enough.For many people, low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) is a blood sugar level below 70 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL), or 3.9 millimoles per liter (mmol/L). But your numbers might be different. Ask your health care provider about the appropriate range to keep your blood sugar (target range).Pay attention to the early warning signs of hypoglycemia and treat low blood sugar promptly. You can raise your blood sugar quickly by eating or drinking a simple sugar source, such as glucose tablets, hard candy or fruit juice. Tell family and friends what symptoms to look for and what to do if you're not able to treat the condition yourself.Initial signs and symptoms of diabetic hypoglycemia include:If diabetic hypoglycemia occurs when you're sleeping, signs and symptoms that may disturb your sleep include:If diabetic hypoglycemia isn't treated, signs and symptoms of hypoglycemia worsen and can include:Severe hypoglycemia may cause:Symptoms can differ from person to person or from episode to episode. Some people don't have any noticeable symptoms. It's also possible you won't have any symptoms of hypoglycemia. It's important to monitor your blood sugar levels regularly and keep track of how you're feeling when your blood sugar is low.Severe hypoglycemia can lead to serious problems, including seizures or unconsciousness, that require emergency care. Make sure your family, friends and co-workers know what to do in an emergency.Inform people you trust about hypoglycemia. If others know what symptoms to look for, they might be able to alert you to early symptoms. It's important that family members and close friends know where you keep glucagon and how to give it so that a potentially serious situation can be easier to safely manage. Glucagon is a hormone that stimulates the release of sugar into the blood.Here's some emergency information to give to others. If you're with someone who is not responding (loses consciousness) or can't swallow due to low blood sugar:If you have symptoms of hypoglycemia several times a week or more, see your health care provider. You may need to change your medication dosage or timing, or otherwise adjust your diabetes treatment regimen.Low blood sugar is most common among people who take insulin, but it can also occur if you're taking certain oral diabetes medications.Common causes of diabetic hypoglycemia include:Most of the body's glucose comes from food. The hormone insulin lowers blood sugar (glucose) levels when blood sugar is too high. If you have type 1 or type 2 diabetes and need insulin to control your blood sugar, taking more insulin than you need can cause your blood sugar level to drop too low and result in hypoglycemia.Your blood sugar can also drop too low if, after taking your diabetes medication, you eat less than usual, or if you exercise more than you typically do, which uses extra glucose. Maintaining the balance between insulin, food and activity isn't always easy. But your health care provider, certified diabetes care and education specialist, and registered dietitian can work with you to try to prevent low blood sugar levels.Some people have a greater risk of diabetic hypoglycemia, including:If you ignore the symptoms of hypoglycemia too long, you may lose consciousness. That's because your brain needs glucose to function. Recognize the signs and symptoms of hypoglycemia early, because if untreated, hypoglycemia can lead to:Take your early symptoms seriously. Diabetic hypoglycemia can increase the risk of serious — even deadly — accidents.To help prevent diabetic hypoglycemia:May 06, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.