The small intestine and colon are components of your digestive tract, which processes the foods you eat. The intestines extract nutrients from the foods. What isn't absorbed by the intestines continues along the digestive tract and is expelled as stool during a bowel movement. Diarrhea can be present due to irregularities in the small intestine or the large intestine.Diarrhea — loose, watery and possibly more-frequent bowel movements — is a common problem. Sometimes, it's the only symptom. At other times, it may be associated with other symptoms, such as nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain or weight loss.Luckily, diarrhea is usually short-lived, lasting no more than a few days. But when diarrhea lasts beyond a few days into weeks, it usually means that there's another problem — such as irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) or a more serious disorder, including ongoing infection, celiac disease or inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).Symptoms associated with diarrhea (loose, watery stools) may include:If you're an adult, see your doctor if:In children, particularly young children, diarrhea can quickly lead to dehydration. Call your doctor if your child's diarrhea doesn't improve within 24 hours or if your child:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesA number of diseases and conditions can cause diarrhea, including:Diarrhea can cause dehydration, which can be life-threatening if untreated. Dehydration is particularly dangerous in children, older adults and those with weakened immune systems.If you have signs of serious dehydration, seek medical help.These include:These include:Wash your hands to prevent the spread of infectious diarrhea. To ensure adequate hand-washing:You can help protect your infant from rotavirus, the most common cause of viral diarrhea in children, with one of two approved vaccines. Ask your baby's doctor about having your baby vaccinated.Diarrhea commonly affects people who travel to countries where there's inadequate sanitation and contaminated food. To reduce your risk:Watch what you drink. Drink bottled water, soda, beer or wine served in its original container. Don't drink tap water or use ice cubes. Use bottled water even for brushing your teeth. Keep your mouth closed while you shower.Beverages made with boiled water, such as coffee and tea, are probably safe. Remember that alcohol and caffeine can aggravate diarrhea and worsen dehydration.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Viruses.Bacteria and parasites.Medicines.Lactose intolerance.Fructose.Artificial sweeteners.Surgery.Other digestive disorders.Wash frequently.Lather with soap for at least 20 seconds.Use hand sanitizer when washing isn't possible.Watch what you eat.Watch what you drink.Ask your health care team about antibiotics.Check for travel warnings.Advertising & Sponsorship