DiGeorge syndrome, also known as 22q11.2 deletion syndrome, is a condition caused when a small part of chromosome 22 is missing. This deletion causes several body systems to develop poorly.The term 22q11.2 deletion syndrome covers terms once thought to be different conditions. These terms include DiGeorge syndrome, velocardiofacial (vel-oh-cahr-dee-oh-fay-shell) syndrome and other conditions caused by the same missing part of chromosome 22. But features may vary slightly.Medical problems commonly related to 22q11.2 deletion syndrome include heart problems, lowered immunity, a cleft palate, complications from low levels of calcium, various eye issues and autoimmune disorders. Complications also include hearing loss, skeletal differences, kidney and genital differences, and delayed development with behavioral and emotional problems.The number and severity of symptoms related to 22q11.2 deletion syndrome vary. But specialists in various fields need to treat almost everyone with this syndrome.Symptoms of DiGeorge syndrome can vary based on what body systems are affected and the severity of the problems. Some symptoms may be clear at birth, but others may not appear until later in infancy or as a young child, or as an adult.Symptoms of DiGeorge syndrome may include: Other symptoms may include:Other conditions may cause symptoms like 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. It's important to get the right diagnosis quickly if your child shows any symptoms listed above.Healthcare professionals may suspect 22q11.2 deletion syndrome:Each person has two copies of chromosome 22 — one inherited from each parent. If a person has DiGeorge syndrome, one copy of chromosome 22 is missing a segment that includes an estimated 30 to 40 genes. Many of these genes haven't been clearly identified and aren't well understood. The region of chromosome 22 that's deleted is known as 22q11.2.The deletion of genes from chromosome 22 usually occurs as a random event in the father's sperm or in the mother's egg. Or it may occur early when the baby is developing. Rarely, the deletion is passed to a child from a parent who also has a deletion in chromosome 22 but may have fewer or mild symptoms.Babies who are missing a portion of chromosome 22, specifically a region known as 22q11.2, are most at risk of DiGeorge syndrome. This missing portion causes several body systems to develop poorly.A ventricular septal defect (VSD) is a hole in the heart that's present at birth (congenital heart defect). The hole is between the lower heart chambers (right and left ventricles). It allows oxygen-rich blood to move back into the lungs instead of being pumped to the rest of the body.In truncus arteriosus, one large vessel comes out of the heart, instead of two separate ones. There's also usually a hole in the wall between the lower heart chambers, called the ventricles. The hole is called a ventricular septal defect. In truncus arteriosus, oxygen-rich blood, shown in red, and oxygen-poor blood, shown in blue, mix together. The mixed blood is shown in purple. It doesn't contain enough oxygen for the body's needs.Tetralogy of Fallot is a combination of four heart changes present at birth. There is a hole in the heart called a ventricular septal defect. There also is a narrowing of the pulmonary valve or other area along the pathway between the heart and lungs. Narrowing of the pulmonary valve is called pulmonary stenosis. The body's main artery, called the aorta, is misplaced. The lower right heart chamber wall is thickened, a condition called right ventricular hypertrophy. Tetralogy of Fallot changes how blood flows through the heart and to the rest of the body.The four tiny parathyroid glands, which lie near the thyroid, make the parathyroid hormone. The hormone plays a role in controlling levels of the minerals calcium and phosphorus in the body.A cleft palate is an opening or split in the roof of the mouth that occurs when the tissue doesn't fuse together during development in the womb. A cleft palate often includes a split (cleft) in the upper lip (cleft lip) but can occur without affecting the lip.The lymphatic system is part of the body's immune system, which protects against infection and disease. The lymphatic system includes the spleen, thymus, lymph nodes and lymph channels, as well as the tonsils and adenoids.The portions of chromosome 22 missing in DiGeorge syndrome affect the development of several body systems. As a result, the condition can cause several errors during fetal development.In some cases, an affected parent may pass DiGeorge syndrome to a child. If you're worried about a family history of 22q11.2 deletion syndrome or if you already have a child with the syndrome, you may want to see a doctor who specializes in genetic conditions. This doctor is called a geneticist. Or you may want to see a genetic counselor to help plan future pregnancies.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.At birth.At well-baby visits.Heart issues.Hypoparathyroidism.Thymus gland dysfunction.Cleft palate.Distinct facial features.Learning, behavioral and mental health problems.Autoimmune conditions.Other problems.Advertising & Sponsorship