Dilated cardiomyopathy is a type of heart muscle disease that causes the heart chambers (ventricles) to thin and stretch, growing larger. It typically starts in the heart's main pumping chamber (left ventricle). Dilated cardiomyopathy makes it harder for the heart to pump blood to the rest of the body. Dilated cardiomyopathy causes the chambers of the heart to grow larger. Untreated, dilated cardiomyopathy can lead to heart failure. Symptoms of dilated cardiomyopathy — such as fatigue and shortness of breath — can mimic other health conditions. A person with dilated cardiomyopathy might not notice any symptoms at first. But dilated cardiomyopathy can become life-threatening. It's a common cause of heart failure.Dilated cardiomyopathy is more common in men than women. Treatment of dilated cardiomyopathy may include medications or surgery to implant a medical device that controls the heartbeat or helps the heart pump blood. Sometimes, a heart transplant is needed.Some people with dilated cardiomyopathy don't have any signs or symptoms in the early stages of the disease.Signs and symptoms of dilated cardiomyopathy may include:If you are short of breath or have other symptoms of dilated cardiomyopathy, see your health care provider as soon as possible. Call 911 or your local emergency number if you have chest pain that lasts more than a few minutes or have severe difficulty breathing.If a family member has dilated cardiomyopathy, talk to your health care provider. Some types of dilated cardiomyopathy run in families (are inherited). Genetic testing may be recommended.It may be difficult to determine the cause of dilated cardiomyopathy. However, many things can cause the left ventricle to dilate and weaken, including:Other possible causes of dilated cardiomyopathy include:Risk factors for dilated cardiomyopathy include:Complications of dilated cardiomyopathy include:Healthy lifestyle habits can help prevent or reduce complications of dilated cardiomyopathy. Try these heart-smart strategies:May 04, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.