A dislocated shoulder is an injury in which the upper arm bone pops out of the cup-shaped socket that's part of the shoulder blade. The shoulder is the body's most flexible joint, which makes it more likely to dislocate.If you suspect a dislocated shoulder, seek prompt medical attention. Most people regain full use of their shoulder within a few weeks. However, once a shoulder dislocates, the joint might be prone to repeat dislocations.The shoulder joint is the most frequently dislocated joint of the body. Because it moves in several directions, your shoulder can dislocate forward, backward or downward. The most common variety is a forward (anterior) dislocation.Dislocated shoulder symptoms can include:Shoulder dislocation can also cause numbness, weakness or tingling near the injury, such as in the neck or down the arm. The muscles in the shoulder might spasm, which can increase the pain.Get medical help right away for a shoulder that appears dislocated.While waiting for medical attention:The shoulder joint is the most frequently dislocated joint of the body. Because it moves in several directions, the shoulder can dislocate forward, backward or downward. It might dislocate completely or partially.Most dislocations occur through the front of the shoulder. The ligaments — tissue that joins the bones — of the shoulder can be stretched or torn, often making the dislocation worse.It takes a strong force, such as a sudden blow to the shoulder, to pull the bones out of place. Extreme twisting of the shoulder joint can pop the ball of the upper arm bone out of the shoulder socket. In a partial dislocation, the upper arm bone is partially in and partially out of the shoulder socket.Causes of a dislocated shoulder include:Anyone can dislocate a shoulder. However, dislocated shoulders occur most often in people in their teens and 20s, particularly athletes involved in contact sports.Complications of a dislocated shoulder might include:Stretched or torn ligaments or tendons in the shoulder or damaged nerves or blood vessels around the shoulder might require surgery for repair.To help prevent a dislocated shoulder:Having a dislocated shoulder joint can increase the risk of future shoulder dislocations. To help avoid a recurrence, keep doing the strength and stability exercises prescribed for the injury.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Don't move the joint.Ice the injured joint.Sports injuries.Trauma not related to sports.Falls.Take careWear protective gearExercise regularlyAdvertising & Sponsorship