Diverticulosis occurs when small, bulging pouches (diverticula) develop in your digestive tract. When one or more of these pouches become inflamed or infected, the condition is called diverticulitis.Diverticulitis is inflammation of irregular bulging pouches in the wall of the large intestine.Typically, the wall of the large intestine, also called the colon, is smooth. An irregular, bulging pouch in the colon wall is called a diverticulum. Multiple pouches are called diverticula.Diverticula are common, especially after age 50. They are usually found in the lower part of the colon. Most often, they don't cause problems. The presence of diverticula is called diverticulosis. Diverticulosis isn't a disease condition.When these pouches become inflamed, the condition is called diverticulitis. Inflammation is immune system activity that increases blood flow and fluids to a site in the body and delivers disease-fighting cells. Inflammation of diverticula can cause severe pain, fever, nausea and changes in your stool habits.Mild diverticulitis is usually treated with rest, changes in your diet and possibly antibiotics. Severe diverticulitis usually needs antibiotic treatment in the hospital. Surgery may be needed for severe or frequent diverticulitis.A common symptom of diverticulitis is pain in the area below the chest called the abdomen. Most often, pain is in the lower left abdomen.Pain from diverticulitis is usually sudden and intense. Pain may be mild and gradually worsen, or the intensity of the pain may vary over time.Other signs and symptoms of diverticulitis may include:Get medical care anytime you have constant, unexplained abdominal pain, particularly if you also have a fever and notable changes in stools.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care.If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.Please, try again in a couple of minutesDiverticula gradually develop over time in the walls of the colon. They are common in older adults. Pressure in the colon — possibly from spasms or straining — may cause diverticula to form where the wall of the colon is weak.Diverticulitis is inflammation of one or more diverticula. This may happen because of bacterial disease or damage to diverticula tissues.Diverticulitis is more common among people over 50. Other factors that increase the risk of diverticulitis include:About 15 percent of people with diverticulitis develop complications. These may include:To help prevent diverticulitis:In the past, healthcare professionals recommended that people with diverticulitis avoid nuts, seeds and popcorn. Studies have shown that these foods do not increase the risk of diverticulitis. Seeds and some nuts are good sources of fiber.Diverticulitis care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Exercise regularly.Eat a high-fiber diet.Maintain a healthy weight.Drink plenty of fluids.Quit smoking and limit alcohol use.Advertising & Sponsorship