A double uterus is a rare condition that is present at birth in some women. In a female fetus, the uterus starts out as two small tubes. As the fetus grows, the tubes typically join to create one larger, hollow organ. This organ is the uterus.Sometimes the tubes don't join completely. Instead, each one develops into a separate organ. A double uterus may have one opening into one vagina. This opening is called the cervix. In other cases, each uterus has its own cervix. Often, there's also a thin wall of tissue that runs down the length of the vagina. This divides the vagina in two, with two separate openings.Women who have a double uterus often have successful pregnancies. But the condition can make you more likely to have a miscarriage or premature birth.A double uterus often causes no symptoms. The condition may be discovered during a regular pelvic exam. Or it may be found during imaging tests to find the cause of repeated miscarriages.Women who have a double vagina along with a double uterus may first see a health care provider for menstrual bleeding that isn't stopped by a tampon. This can happen when a tampon is placed in one vagina, but blood still flows from the second uterus and vagina.Seek medical advice if you have a menstrual flow despite using a tampon. Or if you have severe pain during your periods or you have repeated miscarriages.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Get the latest information from our Mayo Clinic experts on women’s health topics, serious and complex conditions, wellness and more. Click to view a preview and subscribe below.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesHealth experts don't know exactly why some fetuses develop a double uterus. Genetics may play a role. That's because this rare condition sometimes runs in families.The risk factors for a double uterus are not well understood. The cause of the condition isn't known either. Genetics likely plays a role, along with other unknown factors.Many women with a double uterus have active sex lives. They also may have routine pregnancies and successful deliveries. But sometimes a double uterus and other uterine factors can cause:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship