A drug allergy is the reaction of the immune system to a medicine. Any medicine — nonprescription, prescription or herbal — can provoke a drug allergy. However, a drug allergy is more likely with certain medicines.The most common symptoms of drug allergy are hives, rash or fever. But a drug allergy also may cause serious reactions. This includes a severe, life-threatening condition known as anaphylaxis.A drug allergy is not the same as a drug side effect. A side effect is a known possible reaction to a medicine. Side effects to medicines are listed on their drug labels. A drug allergy also is different from drug toxicity. Drug toxicity is caused by an overdose of medicine.Symptoms of a serious drug allergy often occur within an hour after taking a drug. Other reactions, particularly rashes, can occur hours, days or weeks later.Drug allergy symptoms may include:Anaphylaxis is a rare, life-threatening reaction to a drug allergy that causes the widespread dysfunction of body systems. Symptoms of anaphylaxis include:Less-common drug allergy reactions happen days or weeks after exposure to a drug and may persist for some time after you stop taking the drug. These conditions include:Call 911 or emergency medical help if you experience signs of a severe reaction or suspected anaphylaxis after taking a medication.If you have milder symptoms of a drug allergy, see your health care provider as soon as possible.A drug allergy occurs when your immune system mistakenly identifies a drug as a harmful substance, such as a virus or bacterium. Once your immune system detects a drug as a harmful substance, it develops an antibody specific to that drug. This can happen the first time you take a drug, but sometimes an allergy doesn't develop until there have been repeated exposures.The next time you take the drug, these specific antibodies flag the drug and direct immune system attacks on the substance. Chemicals released by this activity cause the symptoms associated with an allergic reaction.You may not be aware of your first exposure to a drug, however. Some evidence suggests that trace amounts of a drug in the food supply, such as an antibiotic, may be sufficient for the immune system to create an antibody to it.Some allergic reactions may result from a somewhat different process. Researchers believe that some drugs can bind directly to a certain type of immune system white blood cell called a T cell. This event causes the release of chemicals that can result in an allergic reaction the first time you take the drug.Although any drug can cause an allergic reaction, some drugs are more commonly associated with allergies. These include:Sometimes a reaction to a drug can produce symptoms virtually the same as those of a drug allergy. However, a drug reaction isn't triggered by immune system activity. This condition is called a nonallergic hypersensitivity reaction or pseudoallergic drug reaction.Drugs that are more commonly associated with this condition include:While anyone can have an allergic reaction to a drug, a few factors can increase your risk. These include:If you have a drug allergy, the best prevention is to stop using the problem drug. Steps you can take to protect yourself include the following:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Serum sickness,Drug-induced anemia,Drug rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS),Inflammation in the kidneys, also called nephritis,Inform health care workers.Wear a bracelet.Advertising & Sponsorship