Dry skin makes the skin look and feel rough, itchy, flaky or scaly. The location where these dry patches form vary from person to person. It's a common condition that affects people of all ages.Dry skin, also known as xerosis or xeroderma, has many causes, including cold or dry weather, sun damage, harsh soaps, and overbathing.You can do a lot on your own to improve dry skin, including moisturizing and practicing sun protection year-round. Try various products and skin care routines to find an approach that works for you.Dry skin is often temporary or seasonal — you might get it only in winter, for example — or you might need to treat it long term. Signs and symptoms of dry skin might vary based on your age, health status, skin tone, living environment and sun exposure. They include:Most cases of dry skin respond well to lifestyle changes and home remedies. You may need help from your primary care doctor or a doctor who specializes in skin conditions (dermatologist) if:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesDry skin is due to water loss from the outer layer of skin. It might be caused by:Anyone can develop dry skin. But you're more likely to develop the condition if you:Dry skin is usually harmless. But when it's not cared for, dry skin may lead to:These complications are most likely to occur when your skin's protective mechanisms are severely compromised. For example, severely dry skin can cause deep cracks or fissures, which can open and bleed, providing an avenue for invading bacteria.Vivien Williams: Drink plenty of water. Don't smoke and wash your face and body each day with a gentle hypoallergenic soap for healthy-looking skin says Mayo Clinic dermatologist, Dr. Dawn Davis. And, after bathing,Dawn Davis, M.D., Dermatology, Mayo Clinic: Moisturize with a hypoallergenic, fragrance-free moisturizer when you're done to help the skin hydrate.Vivien Williams: With so many products from which to choose, how do you pick the right moisturizer? Dr. Davis says hypoallergenic is the key.Dr. Davis: So you want it to be fragrance-free. Unscented doesn't necessarily mean that it doesn't have fragrance. Oftentimes unscented just means more chemicals.Vivien Williams: What ingredient should you look for?Dr. Davis: The most inert natural hypoallergenic product that you can find in a moisturizer is petrolatum.Vivien Williams: As in petroleum jelly. Dr. Davis has another important tip for healthy skin care that could potentially save your life.Dr. Davis: Please remember to wear your sunscreen.Vivien Williams: For the Mayo Clinic News Network, I'm Vivien Williams.Try these tips to help your skin retain moisture:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Heat.Environment.Too much bathing or scrubbing.Harsh soaps and detergents.Other skin conditions.Medical treatments.Aging.Atopic dermatitis (eczema).Infections.Vivien Williams:Dawn Davis, M.D., Dermatology, Mayo Clinic:Vivien Williams:Dr. Davis:Vivien Williams:Dr. Davis:Vivien Williams:Dr. Davis:Vivien Williams:Moisturize.Limit water exposure.Use a gentle cleanser or allergen-free soap.Shave with care.Cover as much skin as possible in cold or windy weather.Wear gloves.Rinse and moisturize after swimming.Drink when you're thirsty.Bathe babies with care.Advertising & Sponsorship