There are three pairs of major salivary glands. These glands are the parotid, sublingual and submandibular glands. Each gland has its own tube, called a duct, leading from the gland to the mouth.Dry mouth, also called xerostomia (zeer-o-STOE-me-uh), is when the salivary glands in the mouth don't make enough saliva to keep the mouth wet. Dry mouth often is due to aging, the side effects of certain medicines or radiation therapy for cancer. Less often, a condition directly affecting the salivary glands can cause dry mouth. You also may experience dry mouth temporarily if you are thirsty or feel anxious about something.For some people, dry mouth is only annoying. For others, dry mouth can greatly affect general health and the health of teeth and gums. Also, it can affect how much people eat and how much they enjoy what they eat.Treatment for dry mouth depends on the cause.If you're not producing enough saliva, you may notice these symptoms all or most of the time:Saliva helps prevent tooth decay by washing away sugar and food particles and making bacteria neutral and less harmful. When you don't have enough saliva, you may find it harder to taste, chew and swallow. You also may have a hard time digesting food.If you have dry mouth symptoms that don't go away, make an appointment with your healthcare professional.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesDry mouth is caused when the salivary glands in the mouth don't make enough saliva to keep the mouth wet. Sometimes these glands may not work properly due to:Risk of dry mouth is higher in people who:Not having enough saliva and getting dry mouth can lead to:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Medicines.Aging.Cancer therapy.Nerve damage.Other health conditions.Snoring and mouth breathing.Tobacco and alcohol use.Use of legal or illegal drugs that may be sold on the streets.Advertising & Sponsorship