Dupuytren contracture is a condition that causes one or more fingers to bend toward the palm of the hand. The affected fingers can't straighten completely. It most often affects the two fingers farthest from the thumb.Dupuytren contracture is a condition that causes one or more fingers to bend toward the palm of the hand. The affected fingers can't straighten completely.Knots of tissue form under the skin. They eventually create a thick cord that can pull the fingers into a bent position. The condition gradually gets worse with time.Dupuytren contracture most often affects the two fingers farthest from the thumb. This can complicate everyday activities such as placing your hands in your pockets, putting on gloves or shaking hands.There's no cure for Dupuytren contracture. Treatments can relieve symptoms and slow how quickly the condition gets worse.Dupuytren contracture gets worse slowly, over years. The condition begins with a firm lump in the palm of the hand. This lump can be painful or painless.Over time, the lump can extend into a hard cord under the skin and up into the finger. This cord tightens and pulls the finger toward the palm, sometimes severely.Dupuytren contracture most commonly affects the two fingers farthest from the thumb. The condition often occurs in both hands.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe cause of Dupuytren contracture is unknown. The condition tends to run in families. It’s more common in men than in women.Risk factors for Dupuytren contracture include:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Age.Sex.Ancestry.Family history.Occupation.Diabetes.Tobacco and alcohol use.Advertising & Sponsorship