Dyshidrosis causes small, fluid-filled blisters to form on the soles of the feet, the palms of the hands or sides of the fingers.Dyshidrosis is a skin condition that causes small, fluid-filled blisters to form on the palms of the hands and sides of the fingers. Sometimes the bottoms of the feet are affected too.The itchy blisters last a few weeks and often come back.Treatment for dyshidrosis most often includes prescription steroid skin creams or ointments. Your doctor or other health care provider may suggest a different treatment, such as light therapy or medicine taken by mouth or injection. The right treatment depends on how severe your symptoms are.Dyshidrosis is also called dyshidrotic eczema and pompholyx.Dyshidrosis symptoms include painful, itchy and fluid-filled blisters on the sides of the fingers, the palms of the hands and the bottoms of the feet. The blisters are small — about the width of a standard pencil lead. They are grouped in clusters and can look like tapioca.With severe disease, the small blisters can merge to form larger blisters. Skin affected by dyshidrosis can be painful and very itchy. After a few weeks, the blisters dry and flake off.Dyshidrosis tends to come back regularly for months or years.Call your doctor if you have a rash on your hands or feet that's severe, doesn't go away, or spreads beyond the hands and feet.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe cause of dyshidrosis isn't known. It tends to happen in people who have a skin condition called atopic dermatitis (eczema) and allergic conditions, such as hay fever or glove allergy. Dyshidrosis isn't contagious.Risk factors for dyshidrosis include:For most people with dyshidrosis, it's just an itchy inconvenience. For others, the pain and itching may limit the use of their hands or feet. Intense scratching can increase the risk of a bacterial infection of the affected skin.After healing, you may notice skin color changes in the affected area. This is called postinflammatory hyperpigmentation. It's more likely to occur in people with brown or Black skin. This complication most often goes away in time without treatment.There's no way to prevent dyshidrosis. It may help to manage stress and avoid exposure to metal salts, such as cobalt and nickel.Good skin care practices may help protect the skin as well. These include:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Stress.Exposure to certain metals.Sensitive skin.Atopic dermatitis.Advertising & Sponsorship