The esophagus is a muscular tube that connects the mouth and the stomach. Rings of muscle called sphincters contract and relax to allow food and liquid to pass.Dysphagia is a medical term for difficulty swallowing. Dysphagia can be a painful condition. In some cases, swallowing is impossible.Occasional difficulty swallowing, such as when you eat too fast or don't chew your food well enough, usually isn't cause for concern. But ongoing dysphagia can be a serious medical condition that needs treatment.Dysphagia can happen at any age, but it's more common in older adults. The causes of swallowing problems vary, and treatment depends on the cause.Symptoms associated with dysphagia can include:See a healthcare professional if you regularly have difficulty swallowing or if weight loss, regurgitation or vomiting happens with your dysphagia.If a blockage makes it hard to breathe, call for emergency help immediately. If you're unable to swallow because you feel that food is stuck in your throat or chest, go to the nearest emergency department.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesSwallowing is complex, involving many muscles and nerves. Any condition that weakens or damages these muscles and nerves or causes narrowing of the back of the throat or esophagus can cause dysphagia.Dysphagia generally falls into one of the following categories.Esophageal dysphagia refers to the sensation of food sticking or getting caught in the base of the throat or in the chest after swallowing begins. Some causes of esophageal dysphagia include:Certain conditions can weaken the throat muscles, making it difficult to move food from the mouth into the throat and esophagus during swallowing. A person might choke, gag or cough when trying to swallow, or have the sensation of food or fluids going down the windpipe, called the trachea, or up the nose. This can lead to pneumonia.Causes of oropharyngeal dysphagia include:The following are risk factors for dysphagia:Difficulty swallowing can lead to:Although swallowing difficulties can't be prevented, you can reduce your risk of occasional difficulty swallowing by eating slowly and chewing your food well. However, if you have symptoms of dysphagia, see a healthcare professional.If you have GERD, see a healthcare professional for treatment.Dysphagia care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Achalasia.Esophageal spasm.A narrowed esophagus.Esophageal tumors.Foreign bodies.Esophageal ring.GERD.Eosinophilic esophagitis.Scleroderma.Radiation therapy.Neurological disorders.Neurological damage.Pharyngoesophageal diverticulum, also known as Zenker diverticulum.Cancer.Aging.Certain health conditions.Malnutrition, weight loss and dehydration.Aspiration pneumonia.Choking.Advertising & Sponsorship