Dystonia is a movement disorder that causes the muscles to contract. This can cause twisting motions or other movements that happen repeatedly and that aren't under the person's control.When the condition affects one part of the body, it's called focal dystonia. When it affects two or more areas of the body next to each other, it's called segmental dystonia. When dystonia affects all parts of the body, it's known as general dystonia. The muscle spasms can range from mild to more serious. They may be painful, and they can affect the person's ability to complete daily tasks.There's no cure for dystonia, but medicines and therapy can improve symptoms. Surgery is sometimes used to disable or regulate nerves or certain brain regions in people with serious dystonia.Dystonia affects different people in different ways. Muscle spasms might:Areas of the body that can be affected include:Early symptoms of dystonia often are mild, occasional and linked to a specific activity. See a member of your healthcare team if you're having muscle contractions that you can't control.The exact cause of dystonia isn't known. But it might involve changes in communication between nerve cells in several regions of the brain. Some forms of dystonia are passed down in families.Dystonia also can be a symptom of another disease or condition, including:Your risk for dystonia increases if you have a family history of the movement disorder. Women also have a higher risk. They have dystonia twice as often as men do.Another risk factor for dystonia is having a condition that causes dystonia, such as Parkinson's disease or Huntington's disease.Depending on the type of dystonia, complications can include:Dystonia care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Neck.Eyelids.Jaw or tongue.Voice box and vocal cords.Hand and forearm.Advertising & Sponsorship