Escherichia coli (E. coli) bacteria normally live in the intestines of healthy people and animals. Most types of E. coli are harmless or cause relatively brief diarrhea. But a few strains, such as E. coli O157:H7, can cause severe stomach cramps, bloody diarrhea and vomiting.You may be exposed to E. coli from contaminated water or food — especially raw vegetables and undercooked ground beef. Healthy adults usually recover from infection with E. coli O157:H7 within a week. Young children and older adults have a greater risk of developing a life-threatening form of kidney failure.Signs and symptoms of E. coli O157:H7 infection usually begin three or four days after exposure to the bacteria. But you may become ill as soon as one day after exposure to more than a week later. Signs and symptoms include:Contact your doctor if your diarrhea is persistent, severe or bloody.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesOnly a few strains of E. coli trigger diarrhea. The E. coli O157:H7 strain belongs to a group of E. coli that produces a powerful toxin that damages the lining of the small intestine. This can cause bloody diarrhea. You develop an E. coli infection when you ingest this strain of bacteria.Unlike many other disease-causing bacteria, E. coli can cause an infection even if you ingest only small amounts. Because of this, you can be sickened by E. coli from eating a slightly undercooked hamburger or from swallowing a mouthful of contaminated pool water.Potential sources of exposure include contaminated food or water and person-to-person contact.The most common way to get an E. coli infection is by eating contaminated food, such as:Human and animal stool may pollute ground and surface water, including streams, rivers, lakes and water used to irrigate crops. Although public water systems use chlorine, ultraviolet light or ozone to kill E. coli, some E. coli outbreaks have been linked to contaminated municipal water supplies.Private water wells are a greater cause for concern because many don't have a way to disinfect water. Rural water supplies are the most likely to be contaminated. Some people also have been infected with E. coli after swimming in pools or lakes contaminated with stool.E. coli bacteria can easily travel from person to person, especially when infected adults and children don't wash their hands properly. Family members of young children with E. coli infection are especially likely to get it themselves. Outbreaks have also occurred among children visiting petting zoos and in animal barns at county fairs.E. coli can affect anyone who is exposed to the bacteria. But some people are more likely to develop problems than are others. Risk factors include:Most healthy adults recover from E. coli illness within a week. Some people — particularly young children and older adults — may develop a life-threatening form of kidney failure called hemolytic uremic syndrome.No vaccine or medication can protect you from E. coli-based illness, though researchers are investigating potential vaccines. To reduce your chance of being exposed to E. coli, avoid swallowing water from lakes or pools, wash your hands often, avoid risky foods, and watch out for cross-contamination.Cook this incorrectly, and you could end up with a case of E. coli."E. coli stands for Escherichia coli, which is a type of bacteria.""Most commonly, we hear about it in raw or undercooked hamburger meat."Dr. Nipunie Rajapakse says E. coli bacteria can create some stomach-turning symptoms, like abdominal pain and nausea. But it can get even worse."There's a specific type of E. coli. It's called O157:H7, which can cause bloody diarrhea and has been associated with a condition that can cause kidney damage, especially in young children."The elderly are also at higher risk for problems with E. coli, as are pregnant women, people with underlying digestive problems and those with weakened immune systems."If somebody were to be exposed to E. coli in something they ate or drank, they may have symptom onset within a couple of days to a few weeks after infection or exposure."Dr. Rajapakse says the best way to avoid a bout with the bacteria is to wash your hands and thoroughly cook your hamburgers.For the Mayo Clinic News Network, I'm Jeff Olsen.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Ground beef.Unpasteurized milk.Fresh produce.Age.Weakened immune systems.Eating certain types of food.Time of year.Decreased stomach acid levels.Cook hamburgers until they're 160 F (71 C).Drink pasteurized milk, juice and cider.Wash raw produce thoroughly.Wash utensils.Keep raw foods separate.Wash your hands.Advertising & Sponsorship