In ectropion, the lower lid sags away from the eye. Because of the sagging lid, your eye can't close completely when you blink, which can cause the eye to be dry and irritated.Ectropion (ek-TROH-pee-on) is a condition in which your eyelid turns outward. This leaves the inner eyelid surface exposed and prone to irritation.Ectropion is more common in older adults, and it generally affects only the lower eyelid. In severe ectropion, the entire length of the eyelid is turned out. In less severe ectropion, only one segment of the eyelid sags away from the eye.Artificial tears and lubricating ointments can help relieve symptoms of ectropion. But usually surgery is needed to fully correct the condition.Normally when you blink, your eyelids distribute tears evenly across your eyes, keeping the surfaces of the eyes lubricated. These tears drain into small openings on the inner part of your eyelids (puncta).If you have ectropion, your lower lid pulls away from your eye and tears don't drain properly into the puncta. The resulting signs and symptoms can include:See your doctor if your eyes are constantly watering or irritated, or your eyelid seems to be sagging or drooping.Seek immediate care if you have been diagnosed with ectropion and you experience:These are signs and symptoms of cornea exposure or ulcers, which can harm your vision.Ectropion can be caused by:Factors that increase your risk of developing ectropion include:Ectropion leaves your cornea irritated and exposed, making it more susceptible to drying. The result can be abrasions and ulcers on the cornea, which can threaten your vision.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Watery eyes (excessive tearing).Excessive dryness.Irritation.Sensitivity to light.Muscle weakness.Facial paralysis.Scars or previous surgeries.Eyelid growths.Genetic disorders.Age.Previous eye surgeries.Previous cancer, burns or trauma.Advertising & Sponsorship