Edema is swelling caused by too much fluid trapped in the body's tissues. Edema can affect any part of the body. But it's more likely to show up in the legs and feet.Medicines and pregnancy can cause edema. It also can be the result of a disease, such as congestive heart failure, kidney disease, venous insufficiency or cirrhosis of the liver.Wearing compression garments and reducing salt in the diet often relieves edema. When a disease causes edema, the disease needs treatment, as well.Swelling of the foot, ankle and leg can be bad enough to leave a dimple, also known as a pit, in the skin after pressing on the area. This swelling, called edema, is the result of too much fluid in the tissues. Congestive heart failure or the vein not working well, also known as venous insufficiency, is often the cause.Symptoms of edema include:Make an appointment to see a health care provider for swelling, stretched or shiny skin, or skin that holds a dimple after being pressed. See a provider right away for:These can be signs of fluid buildup in the lungs, also known as pulmonary edema. It can be life-threatening and needs quick treatment.After sitting for a long time, such as on a long flight, call your care provider if you get leg pain and swelling that won't go away. Especially if the pain and swelling is on one side, these can be symptoms of a blood clot deep in the vein, also known as deep vein thrombosis, or DVT.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesEdema occurs when tiny blood vessels in the body, also known as capillaries, leak fluid. The fluid builds up in nearby tissues. The leak leads to swelling.Causes of mild cases of edema include:Edema also can be a side effect of some medicines. These include:Sometimes edema can be a sign of a more serious condition. Illnesses that can cause edema include:Congestive heart failure. Congestive heart failure causes one or both of the heart's lower chambers stop pumping blood well. As a result, blood can back up in the legs, ankles and feet, causing edema.Congestive heart failure can also cause swelling in the stomach area. This condition also can cause fluid to build up in the lungs. Known as pulmonary edema, this can lead to shortness of breath.The following increases the risk of edema:If left untreated, edema can cause:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Congestive heart failure.Liver damage.Kidney disease.Kidney damage.Weakness or damage to veins in your legs.Deep vein thrombosis, also called DVT.Problems with the system in the body that clears extra fluid from tissues.Severe, long-term lack of protein.Advertising & Sponsorship