Ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis are similar tick-borne illnesses that cause flu-like symptoms, including fever, muscle aches and headache. Signs and symptoms of ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis usually appear within 14 days after a tick bite.If treated quickly with appropriate antibiotics, you'll likely recover within a few days. Untreated ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis can result in serious or life-threatening complications.The best way to prevent these infections is to avoid tick bites. Tick repellents, thorough body checks after being outside and proper removal of ticks are your best defenses against these tick-borne diseases.Signs and symptoms of ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis are generally the same, although they usually are more severe in ehrlichiosis. Symptoms of ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis, which vary widely from person to person, include:Additional signs and symptoms associated with ehrlichiosis but rarely with anaplasmosis include:Some people may be infected and not develop symptoms.The time from getting a bite to showing signs and symptoms is usually five to 14 days. If you develop any of the signs or symptoms after a tick bite or after a possible exposure to ticks, see your doctor.The adult female Lone Star tick displays a characteristic white spot on its back, and may grow to be as large as 1/3 of an inch before feeding.The deer tick (Ixodes scapularis) goes through three life stages. Shown from left to right is the adult female, adult male, nymph and larva on a centimeter scale.Ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis are caused by different bacteria.Ehrlichiosis is caused by different species of ehrlichia bacteria. The Lone Star tick — found in south-central, southeastern and eastern coastal states — is the primary carrier of bacteria causing ehrlichiosis. Black-legged ticks, commonly called deer ticks, in the Upper Midwest are less common carriers.Anaplasmosis is caused by the bacterium Anaplasma phagocytophilum. It's primarily carried by deer ticks in the Upper Midwest, northeastern states and central Canadian provinces. It's also carried by the Western black-legged tick in Western coastal states and other tick species in Europe and Asia.The ehrlichia and anaplasma species belong to the same family of bacteria. Although each bacterium appears to have a specific target among immune system cells in the host, all of these infectious agents generally cause the same symptoms.Ticks feed on blood by latching onto a host and feeding until they're swollen to many times their normal size. Ticks can pick up bacteria from a host, such as a deer, and then spread the bacteria to another host, such as a human. The spread of the bacteria from the tick to the host probably occurs about 24 hours after the tick has begun feeding.Spread of the bacteria causing ehrlichiosis or anaplasmosis is possible through blood transfusions, from mother to fetus, or through direct contact with an infected, slaughtered animal.Ticks live near the ground in wooded or brushy areas. They do not fly or jump, so they can only reach a host who brushes up against them. Factors that increase your risk of a tick bite include:Without prompt treatment, ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis can have serious effects on an otherwise healthy adult or child. People with weakened immune systems are at a higher risk of more-serious and life-threatening complications.Complications of an untreated infection may include:The best way to steer clear of ehrlichiosis or anaplasmosis is to avoid tick bites when you are outdoors. Most ticks attach themselves to your lower legs and feet as you walk or work in grassy, wooded areas or overgrown fields. After a tick attaches to your body, it usually crawls upward to find a location to burrow into your skin.If you are going to be working or playing in an area that is a likely tick habitat, follow these tips to protect yourself.Jeff Olsen: While you're enjoying a hike, ticks are looking for a ride.Dr. Bobbi Pritt: They get themselves in a position. And they will climb up the nearest object, like this blade of grass here.Jeff Olsen: It's called questing.Dr. Bobbi Pritt: It sticks out its legs, and that allows it to grab on to hosts as they walk by.Jeff Olsen: You can lessen the chances you'll become a host.Dr. Bobbi Pritt: Using insect repellents is a good idea.Jeff Olsen: Mayo Clinic parasitic diseases expert Dr. Bobbi Pritt suggests permethrin for your clothing and gear.Dr. Bobbi Pritt: You can really saturate your gear. Leave them out to dry, and, then, the next day, wear them.Jeff Olsen: Use permethrin on materials and DEET on skin. Spray the DEET repellent on exposed skin, including your legs and hands. Avoid your face, but be sure to protect your neck. Then, tuck your pants into your socks. And, on your hike, remember to avoid areas where those questing ticks may be perched.Dr. Bobbi Pritt: That's why you want to stay away from the tall grasses. Stay in the middle.Jeff Olsen: For the Mayo Clinic News Network, I'm Jeff Olsen.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Jeff Olsen:Dr. Bobbi Pritt:Jeff Olsen:Dr. Bobbi Pritt:Jeff Olsen:Dr. Bobbi Pritt:Jeff Olsen:Dr. Bobbi Pritt:Jeff Olsen:Dr. Bobbi Pritt:Jeff Olsen:Advertising & Sponsorship