Eisenmenger syndrome is most often a complication of having a hole between two chambers of the heart. Here, a hole between the heart's main pumping chambers (ventricular septal defect) causes more blood to flow to the lungs' arteries. Eventually this causes these blood vessels to stiffen and narrow, increasing pressure in the lungs' arteries. The high pressure causes the walls of the right lower heart chamber (right ventricle) to thicken (hypertrophy).Eisenmenger (I-sun-meng-ur) syndrome is a long-term complication of an unrepaired heart problem present at birth (congenital heart defect). Eisenmenger syndrome is life-threatening.In Eisenmenger syndrome, there is irregular blood flow in the heart and lungs. This causes the blood vessels in the lungs to become stiff and narrow. Blood pressure rises in the lungs' arteries (pulmonary arterial hypertension). Eisenmenger syndrome permanently damages the blood vessels in the lungs.Early diagnosis and repair of congenital heart defects usually prevents Eisenmenger syndrome. If it does develop, treatment involves regular medical visits and medications to improve symptoms.Symptoms of Eisenmenger syndrome include:If you have any symptoms of Eisenmenger syndrome, see your health care provider. Make an appointment even if you have never been diagnosed with a heart problem. Symptoms such as shortness of breath or chest pain require medical attention.Eisenmenger syndrome is usually caused by an unrepaired hole (shunt) between the main blood vessels or chambers of the heart. A shunt is a heart problem present at birth (congenital heart defect).To understand how Eisenmenger syndrome affects the heart and lungs, it's helpful to know how the heart typically works.The heart is divided into chambers — two upper chambers (atria) and two lower chambers (ventricles).Heart valves control the flow of blood into and out of the chambers of the heart. These valves open to allow blood to move to the next chamber or to one of the arteries, and then close to keep blood from flowing backward.Heart problems present at birth (congenital heart defects) that can cause Eisenmenger syndrome include:In any of these heart problems, blood flows in a way it usually doesn't. As a result, pressure rises in the pulmonary artery. Over time, the increased pressure damages the smaller blood vessels in the lungs. The damaged blood vessel walls make it difficult to pump blood to the lungs.In Eisenmenger syndrome, there's increased blood pressure in the side of the heart that has oxygen-poor blood (blue blood). The blue blood goes through the hole (shunt) in the heart or blood vessels. Oxygen-rich and oxygen-poor blood now mix. This causes low blood oxygen levels.A family history of congenital heart defects increases the risk of similar heart problems in a baby. If you've been diagnosed with Eisenmenger syndrome, talk to your health care provider about screening other family members for congenital heart defects.Eisenmenger syndrome is a life-threatening condition. The outlook for people diagnosed with Eisenmenger syndrome depends on the specific cause and if there are other medical conditions.Without proper treatment and monitoring, complications of Eisenmenger syndrome may include:Eisenmenger syndrome care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Transplants support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.1606 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 15 Replies Fri, Jun 21, 2024 100 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Ventricular septal defect.Atrioventricular canal defect.Atrial septal defect.Patent ductus arteriosus.Low blood oxygen levels.Irregular heart rhythms (arrhythmias).Sudden cardiac arrest.Heart failure.Bleeding in the lungs.Stroke.Kidney problems.Gout.Heart infection.Pregnancy risks.Advertising & Sponsorship