Encephalitis (en-sef-uh-LIE-tis) is inflammation of the brain. It can be caused by viral or bacterial infections, or by immune cells mistakenly attacking the brain. Viruses that can lead to encephalitis can be spread by insects such as mosquitos and ticks.When inflammation is caused by an infection in the brain, it's known as infectious encephalitis. And when it's caused by the immune system attacking the brain, it's known as autoimmune encephalitis. Sometimes there is no known cause.Encephalitis can sometimes lead to death. Getting diagnosed and treated right away is important because it's hard to predict how encephalitis may affect each person.Encephalitis may cause many different symptoms including confusion, personality changes, seizures or trouble with movement. Encephalitis also may cause changes in sight or hearing.Most people with infectious encephalitis have flu-like symptoms, such as:Typically, these are followed by more-serious symptoms over a period of hours to days, such as:In infants and young children, symptoms also might include:One of the major signs of encephalitis in infants is a bulging of the soft spot, also known as the fontanel, of the baby's skull. Pictured here is the anterior fontanel. Other fontanels are found on the sides and back of an infant's head.In autoimmune encephalitis, symptoms may develop more slowly over several weeks. Flu-like symptoms are less common but can sometimes happen weeks before more-serious symptoms start. Symptoms are different for everyone, but it's common for people to have a combination of symptoms, including:Get medical care right away if you experience any of the more-serious symptoms associated with encephalitis. A bad headache, fever and change in consciousness require urgent care.Infants and young children with any symptoms of encephalitis also need urgent care.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesIn about half of patients, the exact cause of encephalitis is not known.In those for whom a cause is found, there are two main types of encephalitis:When a mosquito bites an infected bird, the virus enters the mosquito's bloodstream and eventually moves into its salivary glands. When an infected mosquito bites an animal or a human, known as the host, the virus is passed into the host's bloodstream, where it may cause serious illness.The viruses that can cause encephalitis include:Anyone can develop encephalitis. Factors that may increase the risk include:The complications of encephalitis vary, depending on factors such as:People with relatively mild illness usually recover within a few weeks with no long-term complications.Inflammation can injure the brain, possibly resulting in a coma or death.Other complications may last for months or may be permanent. Complications can vary widely and can include:The best way to prevent viral encephalitis is to take precautions to avoid exposure to viruses that can cause the disease. Try to:To minimize your exposure to mosquitoes and ticks:Insect repellents aren't recommended for use on infants younger than 2 months of age. Instead, cover an infant carrier or stroller with mosquito netting.For older infants and children, repellents with 10% to 30% DEET are considered safe. Products containing both DEET and sunscreen aren't recommended for children. This is because reapplying for sunscreen protection can expose the child to too much DEET.Tips for using mosquito repellent with children include:Encephalitis care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Infectious encephalitis.Autoimmune encephalitis.Herpes simplex virus (HSV).Other herpes viruses.Enteroviruses.Mosquito-borne viruses.Tick-borne viruses.Rabies virus.Age.Weakened immune system.Geographical regions.Season of the year.Autoimmune disease.Smoking.Practice good hygiene.Don't share utensils.Teach your children good habits.Get vaccinations.Dress to protect yourself.Apply mosquito repellent.Use insecticide.Avoid mosquitoes.Get rid of water sources outside your home.Look for outdoor signs of viral disease.Advertising & Sponsorship