Encopresis (en-ko-PREE-sis), sometimes called fecal incontinence or soiling, is the repeated passing of stool (usually involuntarily) into clothing. Typically it happens when impacted stool collects in the colon and rectum: The colon becomes too full and liquid stool leaks around the retained stool, staining underwear. Eventually, stool retention can cause stretching (distention) of the bowels and loss of control over bowel movements.Encopresis usually occurs after age 4, when a child has already learned to use a toilet. In most cases, soiling is a symptom of long-standing constipation. Far less frequently it occurs without constipation and may be the result of emotional issues.Encopresis can be frustrating for parents — and embarrassing for the child. However, with patience and positive reinforcement, treatment for encopresis is usually successful.Signs and symptoms of encopresis may include:Call your doctor if your child is already toilet trained and starts experiencing one or more of the symptoms listed above.There are several causes of encopresis, including constipation and emotional issues.Most cases of encopresis are the result of chronic constipation. In constipation, the child's stool is hard, dry and may be painful to pass. As a result, the child avoids going to the toilet — making the problem worse. The longer the stool remains in the colon, the more difficult it is for the child to push stool out. The colon stretches, ultimately affecting the nerves that signal when it's time to go to the toilet. When the colon becomes too full, soft or liquid stool may leak out around the retained stool or loss of control over bowel movements may occur.Some causes of constipation include:Emotional stress may trigger encopresis. A child may experience stress from:Encopresis is more common in boys than in girls. These risk factors may increase the chances of having encopresis:A child who has encopresis may experience a range of emotions, including embarrassment, frustration, shame and anger. If your child is teased by friends or criticized or punished by adults, he or she may feel depressed or have low self-esteem.Below are some strategies that can help prevent encopresis and its complications.Help your child avoid constipation by providing a balanced diet that's high in fiber and encouraging your child to drink enough water.Educate yourself on effective toilet training techniques. Avoid starting too early or being too forceful in your methods. Wait until your child is ready, and then use positive reinforcement and encouragement to help make progress. Ask your doctor about resources on toilet training.Early treatment, including guidance from your child's doctor or mental health professional, can help prevent the social and emotional impact of encopresis. Regular follow-up visits with your doctor can help identify ongoing or recurring problems so that adjustments in treatment can be made as needed.Sep 25, 2021CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.