Endocarditis is a life-threatening inflammation of the inner lining of the heart's chambers and valves. This lining is called the endocardium.Endocarditis is usually caused by an infection. Bacteria, fungi or other germs get into the bloodstream and attach to damaged areas in the heart. Things that make you more likely to get endocarditis are artificial heart valves, damaged heart valves or other heart defects.Without quick treatment, endocarditis can damage or destroy the heart valves. Treatments for endocarditis include medications and surgery. Endocarditis occurs when bacteria or other germs enter the bloodstream and travel to the heart. The germs then stick to damaged heart valves or damaged heart tissue. Symptoms of endocarditis can vary from person to person. Endocarditis may develop slowly or suddenly. It depends on the type of germs causing the infection and whether there are other heart problems.Common symptoms of endocarditis include:Less common endocarditis symptoms can include:If you have symptoms of endocarditis, see your health care provider as soon as possible — especially if you have a congenital heart defect or history of endocarditis. Less serious conditions may cause similar signs and symptoms. A proper evaluation by a health care provider is needed to make the diagnosis.If you've been diagnosed with endocarditis and have any of the following symptoms, tell your care provider. These symptoms may mean the infection is getting worse:Endocarditis is usually caused by an infection with bacteria, fungi or other germs. The germs enter the bloodstream and travel to the heart. In the heart, they attach to damaged heart valves or damaged heart tissue.Usually, the body's immune system destroys any harmful bacteria that enter the bloodstream. However, bacteria on the skin or in the mouth, throat or gut (intestines) may enter the bloodstream and cause endocarditis under the right circumstances.Many different things can cause germs to get into the bloodstream and lead to endocarditis. Having a faulty, diseased or damaged heart valve increases the risk of the condition. However, endocarditis may occur in those without heart valve problems.Risk factors for endocarditis include: A typical heart has two upper and two lower chambers. The upper chambers, the right and left atria, receive incoming blood. The lower chambers, the more muscular right and left ventricles, pump blood out of the heart. The heart valves, which keep blood flowing in the right direction, are gates at the chamber openings. If you're at risk of endocarditis, tell your health care providers. You may want to request an endocarditis wallet card from the American Heart Association. Check with your local chapter or print the card from the association's website.In endocarditis, irregular growths made of germs and cell pieces form a mass in the heart. These clumps are called vegetations. They can break loose and travel to the brain, lungs, kidneys and other organs. They can also travel to the arms and legs.Complications of endocarditis may include:You can take the following steps to help prevent endocarditis:Certain dental and medical procedures may allow bacteria to enter your bloodstream.If you're at high risk of endocarditis, the American Heart Association recommends taking antibiotics an hour before having any dental work done.You're at high risk of endocarditis and need antibiotics before dental work if you have:If you have endocarditis or any type of congenital heart disease, talk to your dentist and other care providers about your risks and whether you need preventive antibiotics.Jun 25, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.