Endometrial cancer begins in the lining of the uterus, called the endometrium.Endometrial cancer is a type of cancer that begins as a growth of cells in the uterus. The uterus is the hollow, pear-shaped pelvic organ where fetal development happens.Endometrial cancer begins in the layer of cells that form the lining of the uterus, called the endometrium. Endometrial cancer is sometimes called uterine cancer. Other types of cancer can form in the uterus, including uterine sarcoma, but they are much less common than endometrial cancer.Endometrial cancer is often found at an early stage because it causes symptoms. Often the first symptom is irregular vaginal bleeding. If endometrial cancer is found early, surgically removing the uterus often cures it.Symptoms of endometrial cancer may include:Make an appointment with a health care professional if you experience any symptoms that worry you.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe cause of endometrial cancer isn't known. What's known is that something happens to cells in the lining of the uterus that changes them into cancer cells.Endometrial cancer starts when cells in the lining of the uterus, called the endometrium, get changes in their DNA. A cell's DNA holds the instructions that tell the cell what to do. The changes tell the cells to multiply quickly. The changes also tell the cells to continue living when healthy cells would die as part of their natural life cycle. This causes a lot of extra cells. The cells might form a mass called a tumor. The cells can invade and destroy healthy body tissue. In time, the cells can break away and spread to other parts of the body.The ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix and vagina (vaginal canal) make up the female reproductive system.Factors that increase the risk of endometrial cancer include:Changes in the balance of hormones in the body. The two main hormones the ovaries make are estrogen and progesterone. Changes in the balance of these hormones cause changes in the endometrium.A disease or condition that increases the amount of estrogen, but not the level of progesterone, in the body can increase the risk of endometrial cancer. Examples include obesity, diabetes and irregular ovulation patterns, which might happen in polycystic ovary syndrome. Taking hormone therapy medicine that contains estrogen but not progestin after menopause increases the risk of endometrial cancer.A rare type of ovarian tumor that gives off estrogen also can increase the risk of endometrial cancer.To reduce your risk of endometrial cancer, you may wish to:Endometrial cancer care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Gynecologic Cancers support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.63 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 63 Replies Fri, Jun 21, 2024 30 Replies Wed, Jun 19, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Changes in the balance of hormones in the body.More years of menstruation.Never having been pregnant.Older age.Obesity.Hormone therapy for breast cancer.An inherited syndrome that increases the risk of cancer.Talk to your health care team about the risks of hormone therapy after menopause.Consider taking birth control pills.Maintain a healthy weight.Advertising & Sponsorship