With gynecomastia, tissue inside the breast glands grows. This can cause female-appearing breasts.Gynecomastia (guy-nuh-koh-MAS-tee-uh) is an increase in the amount of breast gland tissue in boys or men. An imbalance of the hormones estrogen and testosterone causes it. Gynecomastia can affect one or both breasts, sometimes unevenly.Pseudogynecomastia is an increase in fat but not gland tissue in male breasts.Newborns, boys going through puberty and older men may develop gynecomastia due to natural changes in hormone levels. There are other causes too.Most often, gynecomastia isn't a serious problem. But it can be tough to cope with the condition. People with gynecomastia sometimes have pain in their breasts. And they may feel embarrassed.Gynecomastia may go away on its own. If it doesn't, medicine or surgery may help.Gynecomastia symptoms can include:See a member of your health care team if you have:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesIn people assigned male at birth, the body mainly makes the sex hormone testosterone. It also makes small amounts of the hormone estrogen. Gynecomastia can happen when the amount of testosterone in the body drops compared with estrogen. The decrease can be caused by conditions that lower testosterone or block its effects. Or it can be caused by conditions that raise the estrogen level.Some things that can change the body's hormone balance include the following:The hormones testosterone and estrogen control sex traits. Testosterone controls traits such as muscle mass and body hair. Estrogen controls traits that include the growth of breasts.Estrogen levels that are too high or are out of balance with testosterone levels can cause gynecomastia.The following medicines can cause gynecomastia:Substances that can cause gynecomastia include:Certain health conditions that affect the balance of hormones can either cause or be linked with gynecomastia. They include:Some plant oils used in shampoos, soaps or lotions have been associated with gynecomastia. These include tea tree or lavender oil. This likely is due to compounds in the oil that may mimic estrogen or affect testosterone.Risk factors for gynecomastia include:Gynecomastia has few physical complications. But it may lead to mental health concerns due to changes in how the chest looks.Several factors within your control may lower the risk of gynecomastia:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Gynecomastia in infants.Gynecomastia during puberty.Gynecomastia in adults.Hypogonadism.Aging.Tumors.Hyperthyroidism.Kidney failure.Liver failure and cirrhosis.Malnutrition and starvation.Don't use drugs.Limit or stay away from alcohol.Advertising & Sponsorship