An enlarged heart (cardiomegaly) isn't a disease, but rather a sign of another condition.The term "cardiomegaly" refers to an enlarged heart seen on any imaging test, including a chest X-ray. Other tests are then needed to diagnose the condition that's causing the enlarged heart. If the heart weakens, as it can with heart failure, it begins to enlarge. This forces the heart to work harder to pump blood to the rest of the body. Heart damage and certain types of heart disease can cause an enlarged heart. Sometimes short-term stress on the body, such as pregnancy, can cause the heart to get larger. Depending on the condition, an enlarged heart may be temporary or permanent.Treatment for an enlarged heart may include medications, medical procedures or surgery.In some people, an enlarged heart (cardiomegaly) causes no signs or symptoms. Others may have these signs and symptoms of cardiomegaly:An enlarged heart may be easier to treat when it's detected early. Talk to your health care provider if you have concerns about your heart.Call 911 or your local emergency number if you have signs and symptoms of a potential heart attack:An enlarged heart (cardiomegaly) can be caused by damage to the heart muscle or any condition that makes the heart pump harder than usual, including pregnancy. Sometimes the heart gets larger and becomes weak for unknown reasons. This condition is called idiopathic cardiomyopathy.Conditions associated with an enlarged heart include:Things that can increase the risk of an enlarged heart (cardiomegaly) include:The risk of complications from an enlarged heart depends on the part of the heart affected and the cause. Complications of an enlarged heart can include:Tell your health care provider if anyone in your family has or had cardiomyopathy or other health conditions that caused an enlarged heart. When diagnosed early, proper treatment of the underlying condition may prevent the enlarged heart from getting worse.Following a heart-healthy lifestyle can help prevent or manage some conditions that can lead to an enlarged heart. Take these steps to help prevent an enlarged heart:May 04, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.