Esophagitis is inflammation that damages the lining of the esophagus. An endoscope — a long, flexible tube equipped with a camera — may be used to see inside your esophagus. This endoscopic image of eosinophilic esophagitis shows rings of irregular tissue resulting from chronic inflammation. These are known as esophageal rings.Eosinophilic esophagitis (e-o-sin-o-FILL-ik uh-sof-uh-JIE-tis) is a chronic immune system disease. With this disease, a type of white blood cell, called an eosinophil, builds up in the lining of the tube that connects your mouth to your stomach. This tube is also called the esophagus. This buildup, which is a reaction to foods, allergens or acid reflux, can inflame or injure the esophageal tissue. Damaged esophageal tissue can lead to difficulty swallowing or cause food to get stuck when you swallow.Eosinophilic esophagitis has been identified only since the early '90s, but is now considered a major cause of digestive system illness. Research is ongoing and will likely lead to revisions in the diagnosis and treatment of eosinophilic esophagitis.Signs and symptoms include:Adults:Children:Seek immediate medical attention if you experience chest pain, especially if you also have shortness of breath or jaw or arm pain. These may be symptoms of a heart attack.Make an appointment with your health care provider if you experience severe or frequent eosinophilic esophagitis symptoms. If you take nonprescription medicines for heartburn more than twice a week, see your health care provider.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care.If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.Please, try again in a couple of minutesEosinophils are a typical type of white blood cells present in your digestive tract. However, in eosinophilic esophagitis, you have an allergic reaction to an outside substance. The reaction may occur as follows:There has been a significant increase in numbers of people diagnosed with eosinophilic esophagitis in the past decade. At first, researchers thought this was due to an increase in awareness among health care providers and greater availability of tests. However, studies now suggest that the disease is becoming increasingly common, parallel to the increase in asthma and allergies.The following risk factors are associated with eosinophilic esophagitis:In some people, eosinophilic esophagitis can lead to the following:Eosinophilic esophagitis care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Reaction of the esophagus.Multiplication of eosinophils.Damage to the esophagus.Dysphagia and impaction.Additional symptoms.Climate.Season.Sex.Family history.Allergies and asthma.Age.Scarring and narrowing of the esophagus.Damage to the esophagus.Advertising & Sponsorship