Junctional epidermolysis bullosa can show up at birth. Large, open sores are common and can lead to infections and loss of body fluids. As a result, severe forms of the disease may be fatal.Epidermolysis bullosa (ep-ih-dur-MOL-uh-sis buhl-LOE-sah) is a rare condition that causes fragile, blistering skin. The blisters may appear in response to minor injury, even from heat, rubbing or scratching. In severe cases, the blisters may occur inside the body, such as the lining of the mouth or stomach.Epidermolysis bullosa is inherited, and it usually shows up in infants or young children. Some people don't develop symptoms until they're teens or young adults.Epidermolysis bullosa has no cure, but mild forms may improve with age. Treatment focuses on caring for blisters and preventing new ones.Epidermolysis bullosa symptoms include:Usually epidermolysis bullosa blisters are noticed during infancy. But it's not uncommon for them to appear when a toddler first begins to walk or when an older child begins new activities that cause more friction on the soles of the feet.Contact your health care provider if you or your child develops blisters for an unknown reason. For infants, severe blistering can be life-threatening.Seek immediate medical care if you or your child:Depending on the type of epidermolysis bullosa, blistering may occur in the top layer of skin (epidermis), the bottom layer (dermis) or the layer that separates the two (basement membrane zone).In an autosomal dominant disorder, the changed gene is a dominant gene. It's located on one of the nonsex chromosomes, called autosomes. Only one changed gene is needed for someone to be affected by this type of condition. A person with an autosomal dominant condition — in this example, the father — has a 50% chance of having an affected child with one changed gene and a 50% chance of having an unaffected child.To have an autosomal recessive disorder, you inherit two changed genes, sometimes called mutations. You get one from each parent. Their health is rarely affected because they have only one changed gene. Two carriers have a 25% chance of having an unaffected child with two unaffected genes. They have a 50% chance of having an unaffected child who also is a carrier. They have a 25% chance of having an affected child with two changed genes.Epidermolysis bullosa simplex usually becomes apparent at birth or during early infancy. It's the most common and least severe type. Blistering may be mild when compared with other types.Dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa generally becomes apparent at birth or during early childhood. The more-severe forms can lead to rough, thickened skin, scarring, and misshapen hands and feet.Epidermolysis bullosa is caused by an inherited gene. You may inherit the disease gene from one parent who has the disease (autosomal dominant inheritance) or from both parents (autosomal recessive inheritance).The skin is made up of an outer layer (epidermis) and an underlying layer (dermis). The area where the layers meet is called the basement membrane. The types of epidermolysis bullosa are mainly defined by which layers separate and form blisters. The skin injury might be brought on by a minor injury, bump or nothing at all.The main types of epidermolysis bullosa are:Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita is distinct from these conditions, as it isn't inherited and it's rare in children.The major risk factor for developing epidermolysis bullosa is having a family history of the disorder.Epidermolysis bullosa can worsen even with treatment, so it's important to spot signs of complications early. Complications may include:It's not possible to prevent epidermolysis bullosa. But these steps may help prevent blisters and infection.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Seek immediate medical careEpidermolysis bullosa simplex.Junctional epidermolysis bullosa.Dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa.Kindler syndrome.Infection.Bloodstream infection.Fusion of fingers and changes in the joints.Problems with nutrition.Constipation.Dental problems.Skin cancer.Death.Handle your child gently.Take special care with the diaper area.Keep the home environment cool.Keep the skin moist.Dress your child in soft clothes.Prevent scratching.Encourage your child to be active.Cover hard surfaces.Advertising & Sponsorship