Illustration of epidermoid cyst on different skin colors. Epidermoid cysts occur most often on the face, neck and trunk.Epidermoid (ep-ih-DUR-moid) cysts are harmless small bumps beneath the skin. They are most common on the face, neck and trunk.Epidermoid cysts are slow growing and often painless, so they rarely cause problems or need treatment. You might choose to have a cyst removed if it bothers you, breaks open, or is painful or infected.Epidermoid cyst signs and symptoms include:Most epidermoid cysts don't cause problems or need treatment. See your healthcare professional if you have a cyst that:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe surface of the skin, also called the epidermis, is made up of a thin, protective layer of cells that the body sheds nonstop. Most epidermoid cysts form when these cells move deeper into the skin rather than shed. Sometimes this type of cyst forms due to irritation or injury of the skin or a hair follicle.Epidermal cells form the walls of the cyst and then secrete the protein keratin into it. Keratin is the thick, cheesy substance that can leak from the cyst.Anyone can develop an epidermoid cyst, but these factors make it more likely:Potential complications of epidermoid cysts include:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Inflammation.Rupture.Skin cancer.Advertising & Sponsorship