Epididymitis (ep-ih-did-uh-MY-tis) is an inflammation of the coiled tube, called the epididymis, at the back of the testicle. The epididymis stores and carries sperm. Males of any age can get epididymitis.Epididymitis is most often caused by a bacterial infection, including sexually transmitted infections (STIs), such as gonorrhea or chlamydia. Sometimes, a testicle also becomes inflamed — a condition called epididymo-orchitis.Epididymitis is usually treated with antibiotics and measures to relieve discomfort.Epididymitis is an inflammation of the coiled tube, called the epididymis, at the back of the testicle.Symptoms of epididymitis might include:Epididymitis that lasts longer than six weeks or that happens over and over again is considered chronic. Symptoms of chronic epididymitis might come on slowly. Sometimes the cause of chronic epididymitis isn't able to be found.Don't ignore scrotal pain or swelling. This can be caused by a number of conditions. Some of them need treatment right away to avoid permanent damage.If you have severe pain in the scrotum, seek emergency treatment. If you have discharge from your penis or pain when you pass urine, see a health care provider.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe male reproductive system makes, stores and moves sperm. The testicles produce sperm. Fluid from the seminal vesicles and prostate gland combines with sperm to make semen. The penis ejaculates semen during sexual intercourse.Causes of epididymitis include:Certain sexual behaviors that can lead to STIs put you at risk of sexually transmitted epididymitis, including having:Risk factors for epididymitis that's not sexually transmitted include:Complications of epididymitis include:To help protect against STIs that can cause epididymitis, practice safer sex.If you have recurrent urinary tract infections or other risk factors for epididymitis, your health care provider might talk with you about other ways you can help prevent the condition.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.STIs.Other infections.Urine in the epididymis.Trauma.Tuberculosis.Advertising & Sponsorship