The throat includes the esophagus; windpipe, also known as the trachea; voice box, also known as the larynx; tonsils; and epiglottis.Epiglottitis happens when the epiglottis — a small cartilage "lid" that covers the windpipe — swells. The swelling blocks the flow of air into the lungs. Epiglottitis can be deadly.Many factors can cause the epiglottis to swell. These factors include infections, burns from hot liquids and injuries to the throat.Epiglottitis can happen at any age. Once, mainly children got it. The most common cause of epiglottitis in children was infection with Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) bacteria. The bacterium also causes pneumonia, meningitis and blood infections.Routine Hib vaccination for infants has made epiglottitis rare in children. It's now more common in adults. The condition needs quick care to prevent deadly complications.Children can develop symptoms of epiglottitis within hours. Symptoms can include:Adults might get symptoms over days rather than hours. Symptoms might include:Epiglottitis is a medical emergency. If you or someone you know suddenly has trouble breathing and swallowing, call your local emergency number or go to the nearest hospital emergency department. Try to keep the person quiet and upright, because this position can make it easier to breathe.An infection or injury causes epiglottitis.In the past, a common cause of swelling and inflammation of the epiglottis and surrounding tissues was infection with Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) bacteria. Hib is responsible for other conditions, the most common being meningitis. Hib is now much less common in developed countries where children get Hib vaccines.Hib spreads when an infected person coughs or sneezes droplets into the air. It's possible to have Hib in the nose and throat without becoming sick. But spreading it to others is still possible.In adults, other bacteria and viruses also can cause the epiglottis to swell. These include:Rarely, physical injury, such as a blow to the throat, can cause epiglottitis. So can burns from drinking very hot liquids and breathing in smoke from a fire.Symptoms like those of epiglottitis can come from:Some factors increase the risk of getting epiglottitis, including:Epiglottitis can cause many complications, including:Breathing failure. The epiglottis is a small, movable "lid" just above the larynx that prevents food and drink from entering the windpipe. Swelling of the epiglottis can completely block the airway.This can lead to breathing or respiratory failure. In this life-threatening condition, the level of oxygen in the blood drops very low.Getting the Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) vaccine prevents epiglottitis caused by Hib. In the United States, children usually receive the vaccine in three or four doses:Because children older than 5 and adults are less likely to develop Hib infection, they're not usually given the vaccine. But the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends the vaccine for older children and adults whose immune systems are weak because of:The Hib vaccine isn't foolproof. Some vaccinated children have had epiglottitis — and other germs can cause epiglottitis too. That's where using common sense comes in:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Streptococcus pneumoniae (pneumococcus).Streptococcus A, B and C.Staphylococcus aureus.Having a weakened immune system.Not being fully vaccinated.Breathing failure.Spreading infection.Allergic reaction.Possible mild side effects.Advertising & Sponsorship