Epithelioid sarcoma is a rare type of cancer that starts as a growth of cells in the soft tissue. It can happen anywhere on the body. It often starts under the skin on the finger, hand, forearm, knee or lower leg.Epithelioid sarcoma might cause a small, firm growth or lump under the skin, which is called a nodule. It often does not hurt. There may be one growth or a few growths. Sometimes the growths cause sores on the skin that do not heal.Epithelioid sarcoma often affects teenagers and young adults. But it can also affect older people. Epithelioid sarcoma tends to grow slowly. It often comes back after treatment.Epithelioid sarcoma is a type of cancer called a soft tissue sarcoma. These cancers happen in the body's connective tissues. There are many types of soft tissue sarcoma. Soft tissue sarcomas, including epithelioid sarcoma, are not common. It is best to seek care at a cancer center that has experience treating people with sarcoma.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Subscribe for free and receive an in-depth guide to coping with cancer, plus helpful information on how to get a second opinion. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview.ErrorSelect a topicErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.Your in-depth coping with cancer guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest about cancer news, research, and care.If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.Please, try again in a couple of minutesEpithelioid sarcoma can be hard to diagnose. It looks like problems that are much more common. Often health care providers consider those more common problems first. For example, a sore on the skin that is not healing could be mistaken for a skin infection.Tests and procedures used in diagnosis of epithelioid sarcoma include:Surgery is the most common treatment for epithelioid sarcoma. Sometimes other treatments may be used in addition to surgery. Treatment options may include:Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Sarcoma support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.803 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 57 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 59 Replies Fri, Jun 21, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Imaging tests.Getting tissue for testing.Surgery.Radiation therapy.Targeted therapy.Chemotherapy.Clinical trials.Advertising & Sponsorship