Learn more from Matthew Ziegelmann, M.D.I'm Dr. Matthew Ziegelmann, a urologist at Mayo Clinic. In this video, we'll cover the basics of erectile dysfunction. What is it? Who gets it? The symptoms, diagnosis, and the treatments. Whether you're looking for answers for yourself or for someone you love, we're here to give you the best information available. Erectile dysfunction, also known as impotence, is defined by difficulty getting and keeping an erection. It can be an embarrassing thing to talk about. It's been reported that more than half of men between the ages of 40 and 70 experience some form of ED. So take comfort in knowing that you are not alone. Experiencing difficulty with erections from time to time is usually no cause for concern. But ongoing issues can cause stress, it can affect self-confidence, and it can contribute to relationship problems. Sometimes it may indicate an underlying condition. The bottom line is that if you experience ED, you should talk about it with your doctor, even if you're embarrassed, because we have a number of ways that we can effectively treat erectile dysfunction. ED can be caused by physical or psychological issues. Sexual arousal is a complicated process. It involves your brain, your hormones, your nerves, your muscles, and your blood vessels. A hiccup in any of these can cause a problem.The fact is that erectile dysfunction affects men of all ages. However, as you get older, your risk can increase. This is not only because erections take longer to develop, but also that other contributing factors may come into play. Physical issues like heart disease, high cholesterol, high blood pressure, diabetes, obesity, and smoking can all cause erectile dysfunction. On the other hand, depression, anxieties, stress, relationship problems, and other mental health concerns can also interfere with sexual feelings. And this can cause or worsen your erectile problems. Often, it's a bit of both. So it's important to understand one's physical and psychological state to know the underlying cause of one's erectile dysfunction.Unlike a lot of medical conditions, the symptoms of erectile dysfunction are rather straightforward. If you have persistent trouble getting or keeping an erection, you might have erectile dysfunction. If you're dealing with any of these symptoms, a family doctor or an internist is usually a good place to start.Usually, the hardest part of diagnosing erectile dysfunction is overcoming that embarrassment that comes with talking about your ED. But once you talk to your doctor, you'll find that it's common, and a diagnosis can happen quickly. For many people, a physical exam and answering some basic questions about your medical history is all that is needed. If you have chronic health conditions or your doctor suspects an underlying condition might be involved, you could need further tests or a consultation with a specialist such as me.Millions of men are able to successfully treat their erectile dysfunction. Oral prescription medications are one popular route. Taking medications does not automatically produce an erection. These tablets amplify the effects of nitric oxide. This is a chemical that your body produces that relaxes muscles in the penis. Sexual stimulation releases this chemical and these medications enhance its effect, allowing for an erection. Other less common, but effective, medications for ED include self-injections or urethral suppositories. If medications aren't effective, your doctor may recommend a vacuum penis pump. This device uses a hollow tube to create a vacuum that pulls blood into your penis. Penile implants are another option and involve surgically placing a device that allows the penis to achieve an erection. If your ED is impacting your mental health or your relationship, your doctor may also recommend that you and your partner visit a psychologist or a sexual therapist. What your treatment ultimately looks like depends on the cause and severity of your erectile dysfunction, as well as any underlying health condition that may be present. Your doctor will be able to work with you to find the right solution.Erectile dysfunction can be an uncomfortable topic to discuss with your doctor, with your partner and with your friends. But don't assume that you're alone. Involve your partner, and communicate openly and honestly about your condition. Try to remember that it's very common. And more importantly, it's very treatable. If you'd like to learn more about erectile dysfunction, here are some other related videos. Or you can visit mayoclinic.org. We wish you well.The penis contains two cylinder-shaped, spongelike structures called the corpora cavernosa. During sexual arousal, nerve impulses increase blood flow to both cylinders. This sudden influx of blood causes an erection by expanding, straightening and stiffening the penis.Erectile dysfunction (impotence) is the inability to get and keep an erection firm enough for sex.Having erection trouble from time to time isn't necessarily a cause for concern. If erectile dysfunction is an ongoing issue, however, it can cause stress, affect your self-confidence and contribute to relationship problems. Problems getting or keeping an erection can also be a sign of an underlying health condition that needs treatment and a risk factor for heart disease.If you're concerned about erectile dysfunction, talk to your doctor — even if you're embarrassed. Sometimes, treating an underlying condition is enough to reverse erectile dysfunction. In other cases, medications or other direct treatments might be needed.Erectile dysfunction symptoms might include persistent:A family doctor is a good place to start when you have erectile problems. See your doctor if:Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your health concerns. Visit Mayo Clinic Men's Health to get started.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesMale sexual arousal is a complex process that involves the brain, hormones, emotions, nerves, muscles and blood vessels. Erectile dysfunction can result from a problem with any of these. Likewise, stress and mental health concerns can cause or worsen erectile dysfunction.Sometimes a combination of physical and psychological issues causes erectile dysfunction. For instance, a minor physical condition that slows your sexual response might cause anxiety about maintaining an erection. The resulting anxiety can lead to or worsen erectile dysfunction.In many cases, erectile dysfunction is caused by something physical. Common causes include:The brain plays a key role in triggering the series of physical events that cause an erection, starting with feelings of sexual excitement. A number of things can interfere with sexual feelings and cause or worsen erectile dysfunction. These include:As you get older, erections might take longer to develop and might not be as firm. You might need more direct touch to your penis to get and keep an erection.Various risk factors can contribute to erectile dysfunction, including:Complications resulting from erectile dysfunction can include:The best way to prevent erectile dysfunction is to make healthy lifestyle choices and to manage any existing health conditions. For example:Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your health concerns. Visit Mayo Clinic Men's Health to get started.Erectile dysfunction care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Medical conditions,Tobacco use,Being overweight,Certain medical treatments,Injuries,Medications,Psychological conditions,Drug and alcohol use,Advertising & Sponsorship