Esophageal varices are enlarged veins in the esophagus. They're often due to obstructed blood flow through the portal vein, which carries blood from the intestine to the liver.Esophageal varices are enlarged veins in the esophagus, the tube that connects the throat and stomach. Esophageal varices most often happen in people with serious liver diseases.Esophageal varices develop when regular blood flow to the liver is blocked by a clot or scar tissue in the liver. To go around the blockages, blood flows into smaller blood vessels that aren't designed to carry large volumes of blood. The vessels can leak blood or even burst, causing life-threatening bleeding.A few medicines and medical procedures are available to help prevent or stop bleeding from esophageal varices.Esophageal varices usually don't cause symptoms unless they bleed. Symptoms of bleeding esophageal varices include:Your doctor might suspect esophageal varices if you have signs of liver disease or been diagnosed with liver cirrhosis, including:Make an appointment with your health care provider if you have symptoms that worry you. If you've been diagnosed with liver disease, ask your provider about your risk of esophageal varices and what you can do to reduce your risk. Also ask whether to get a procedure to check for esophageal varices.If you've been diagnosed with esophageal varices, your provider will likely tell you to watch for signs of bleeding. Bleeding esophageal varices are an emergency. Call 911 or your local emergency services right away if you have black or bloody stools, or bloody vomit.Esophageal varices sometimes form when blood flow to your liver is blocked. This is most often caused by scar tissue in the liver due to liver disease, also known as cirrhosis of the liver. The blood flow begins to back up. This increases pressure within the large vein, known as the portal vein, that carries blood to your liver. This condition is called portal hypertension.Portal hypertension forces the blood to seek other pathways through smaller veins, such as those in the lowest part of the esophagus. These thin-walled veins balloon with the added blood. Sometimes they rupture and bleed.Causes of esophageal varices include:Although many people with advanced liver disease develop esophageal varices, most won't have bleeding. Esophageal varices are more likely to bleed if you have:If you've had bleeding from esophageal varices before, you're more likely to have varices that bleed again.The most serious complication of esophageal varices is bleeding. Once you've had a bleeding episode, your risk of another bleeding episode greatly increases. If you lose enough blood, you can go into shock, which can lead to death.Currently, no treatment can prevent the development of esophageal varices in people with cirrhosis. While beta blocker drugs are effective in preventing bleeding in many people who have esophageal varices, they don't prevent esophageal varices from forming.If you've been diagnosed with liver disease, ask your health care provider about strategies to avoid liver disease complications. To keep your liver healthy:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Severe liver scarring, called cirrhosis.Blood clot, also called thrombosis.Parasitic infection.High portal vein pressure.Large varices.Red marks on the varices.Severe cirrhosis or liver failure.Continued alcohol use.Don't drink alcohol.Eat a healthy diet.Maintain a healthy weight.Use chemicals sparingly and carefully.Reduce your risk of hepatitis.Advertising & Sponsorship