Esophagitis (uh-sof-uh-JIE-tis) is inflammation of the esophagus. The esophagus is the muscular tube that delivers food from your mouth to your stomach.Esophagitis can cause painful, difficult swallowing and chest pain. Many different things can cause esophagitis. Some common causes include stomach acids backing up into the esophagus, infection, oral medicines and allergies.Treatment for esophagitis depends on the underlying cause and how badly the tissue lining the esophagus is damaged. If left untreated, esophagitis can damage this lining and interfere with its function, which is to move food and liquid from your mouth to your stomach. Esophagitis also can lead to complications such as scarring or narrowing of the esophagus, unintended weight loss and dehydration.Common symptoms of esophagitis include:In infants and young children, particularly those too young to explain their discomfort or pain, symptoms of esophagitis may include: Most symptoms of esophagitis can be caused by a few different conditions affecting the digestive system. See your health care provider if symptoms:Get emergency care if you:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care.If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.Please, try again in a couple of minutesEsophagitis is generally labeled by the condition that causes it. In some cases, it may have more than one cause. Some of the most common types include:A valve called the lower esophageal sphincter usually keeps the acidic contents of the stomach out of the esophagus. But sometimes this valve doesn't close properly or opens when it shouldn't. The upper part of the stomach can sometimes slide into the chest above the diaphragm, known as a hiatal hernia. If this happens, the contents of the stomach may back up into the esophagus (gastroesophageal reflux).Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is a condition in which this backflow of acid is a frequent or ongoing problem. A complication of GERD is ongoing inflammation and tissue damage in the esophagus.Esophagitis is inflammation that damages the lining of the esophagus. An endoscope — a long, flexible tube equipped with a camera — may be used to see inside your esophagus. This endoscopic image of eosinophilic esophagitis shows rings of irregular tissue resulting from chronic inflammation. These are known as esophageal rings.Eosinophils (e-o-SIN-o-fils) are white blood cells that play a key role in allergic reactions. Eosinophilic esophagitis can occur if there is a high concentration of these white blood cells in the esophagus. This is most likely in response to an allergy-causing agent (allergen), acid reflux or both.In many cases, this type of esophagitis may be triggered by foods such as milk, eggs, wheat, soy, peanuts and seafood. However, typical allergy testing does not reliably identify these culprit foods.People with eosinophilic esophagitis may have other nonfood allergies. For example, sometimes allergens in the air, such as pollen, may be the cause. The most common symptom of eosinophilic esophagitis is food impaction or trouble swallowing, also called dysphagia.Lymphocytic esophagitis (LE) is an uncommon esophageal condition in which there are an increased number of white blood cells known as lymphocytes in the lining of the esophagus. LE may be related to eosinophilic esophagitis or to GERD.Several oral medicines may cause tissue damage if they remain in contact with the lining of the esophagus for too long. For example, if you swallow a pill with little or no water, the pill itself or residue from the pill may remain in the esophagus. Medicines that have been linked to esophagitis include:A bacterial, viral or fungal infection in tissues of the esophagus may cause esophagitis. Infectious esophagitis is fairly rare and occurs most often in people with poor immune system function, such as people with HIV/AIDS or cancer.A fungus usually present in the mouth called Candida albicans is a common cause of infectious esophagitis. Such infections are often associated with poor immune system function, diabetes, cancer, or the use of steroid or antibiotic medications.Risk factors for esophagitis vary depending on the different causes of the disorder.Factors that increase the risk of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), and therefore are factors in reflux esophagitis, include the following:Several foods may worsen symptoms of GERD or reflux esophagitis:Risk factors for eosinophilic esophagitis, or allergy-related esophagitis, may include:Factors that may increase the risk of drug-induced esophagitis are generally related to issues that prevent quick and complete passage of a pill into the stomach. These factors include:Risk factors for infectious esophagitis often relate to medications, such as steroids or antibiotics. People with diabetes also are at increased risk of candida esophagitis in particular.Other causes of infectious esophagitis may relate to poor immune system function. This may be due to an immune disorder, HIV/AIDS or certain cancers. Also, certain cancer treatments and drugs that block immune system reactions to transplanted organs (immunosuppressants) may increase the risk of infectious esophagitis.Left untreated, esophagitis can lead to changes in the structure of the esophagus. Possible complications include:Esophagitis care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship