Essential tremor is a nervous system condition, also known as a neurological condition, that causes involuntary and rhythmic shaking. It can affect almost any part of the body, but the trembling occurs most often in the hands, especially when doing simple tasks, such as drinking from a glass or tying shoelaces.Essential tremor is usually not a dangerous condition, but it typically worsens over time and can be severe in some people. Other conditions don't cause essential tremor, although essential tremor is sometimes confused with Parkinson's disease.Essential tremor can occur at any age but is most common in people age 40 and older.Essential tremor symptoms:Many people associate tremors with Parkinson's disease, but the two conditions differ in key ways:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesAbout half the people with essential tremor appear to have an altered gene. This form is referred to as familial tremor. It isn't clear what causes essential tremor in people who don't have familial tremor.In an autosomal dominant disorder, the changed gene is a dominant gene. It's located on one of the nonsex chromosomes, called autosomes. Only one changed gene is needed for someone to be affected by this type of condition. A person with an autosomal dominant condition — in this example, the father — has a 50% chance of having an affected child with one changed gene and a 50% chance of having an unaffected child.Known risk factors for essential tremor include:Altered gene. The inherited variety of essential tremor, known as familial tremor, is an autosomal dominant disorder. An altered gene from just one parent is needed to pass on the condition.Anyone who has a parent with an altered gene for essential tremor has a 50% chance of developing the condition.Essential tremor isn't life-threatening, but symptoms often worsen over time. If the tremors become severe, it might be difficult to:Essential tremor care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Timing of tremors.Associated conditions.Parts of the body affected.Altered gene.Age.Advertising & Sponsorship