Esthesioneuroblastoma (es-thee-zee-o-noo-row-blas-TOE-muh) is a rare type of cancer that starts in the upper part of the inside of the nose, known as the nasal cavity. Esthesioneuroblastoma also is called olfactory neuroblastoma.This cancer usually affects adults in their 50s and 60s. But it can occur at any age. Esthesioneuroblastoma usually begins as a growth of cells, called a tumor, inside the nose. It might grow and go into the sinuses, eyes and brain. It also can spread to other parts of the body.People with esthesioneuroblastoma can lose their sense of smell. They might get nosebleeds. And they might have trouble breathing through their nose as the tumor grows.Esthesioneuroblastoma treatment usually includes surgery. Often, radiation and chemotherapy are part of the treatment as well.Esthesioneuroblastoma symptoms include:As the cancer grows, it might cause eye pain, loss of vision, ear pain and headaches.Make an appointment with your health care team if you have lasting symptoms that worry you.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Subscribe for free and receive an in-depth guide to coping with cancer, plus helpful information on how to get a second opinion. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview.ErrorSelect a topicErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.Your in-depth coping with cancer guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest about cancer news, research, and care.If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.Please, try again in a couple of minutesExperts haven't found the exact cause of esthesioneuroblastoma. In general, cancer happens when cells get changes in their DNA. A cell's DNA holds the instructions that tell a cell what to do. The changes tell the cells to make many more cells quickly. The changes give the cells the ability to keep living when healthy cells would naturally die. This causes too many cells.The cells might form a mass called a tumor. The tumor can grow to invade and destroy healthy body tissue. In time, cells can break away and spread to other parts of the body.Complications of esthesioneuroblastoma may include:Esthesioneuroblastoma care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Head & Neck Cancer support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.37 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 9 Replies Fri, Jun 07, 2024 69 Replies Fri, Jun 07, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Cancer that grows into nearby organs and tissues.Spread of the cancer, known as metastasis.Advertising & Sponsorship