Ewing sarcoma is a type of cancer that begins as a growth of cells in the bones and the soft tissue around the bones. Ewing (Yoo-ing) sarcoma mostly happens in children and young adults, although it can happen at any age.Ewing sarcoma most often begins in the leg bones and in the pelvis, but it can happen in any bone. Less often, it starts in the soft tissues of the chest, abdomen, arms or other locations.Major advances in the treatment of Ewing sarcoma have improved the outlook for this cancer. Young people diagnosed with Ewing sarcoma are living longer. They sometimes face late effects from the strong treatments. Healthcare professionals often suggest long-term monitoring for side effects after treatment.Ewing sarcoma signs and symptoms typically start in and around a bone. This cancer most often affects bones in the legs and the pelvis.When symptoms happen in and around a bone, they might include:Sometimes Ewing sarcoma causes symptoms that affect the whole body. These can include:Make an appointment with a healthcare professional if you or your child has ongoing signs and symptoms that worry you.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Subscribe for free and receive an in-depth guide to coping with cancer, plus helpful information on how to get a second opinion. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview.ErrorSelect a topicErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.Your in-depth coping with cancer guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest about cancer news, research, and care.If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.Please, try again in a couple of minutesIt is not clear what causes Ewing sarcoma.Ewing sarcoma happens when cells develop changes in their DNA. A cell's DNA holds the instructions that tell a cell what to do. In healthy cells, the DNA gives instructions to grow and multiply at a set rate. The instructions tell the cells to die at a set time.In cancer cells, the DNA changes give different instructions. The changes tell the cancer cells to make many more cells quickly. Cancer cells can keep living when healthy cells would die.The cancer cells might form a mass called a tumor. The tumor can grow to invade and destroy healthy body tissue. In time, cancer cells can break away and spread to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads, it is called metastatic cancer.In Ewing sarcoma, the DNA changes most often affect a gene called EWSR1. If your healthcare professional suspects that you or your child has Ewing sarcoma, the cancer cells may be tested to look for changes in this gene.Risk factors for Ewing sarcoma include:There's no way to prevent Ewing sarcoma.Complications of Ewing sarcoma and its treatment include the following.Ewing sarcoma can spread from where it started to other areas. Ewing sarcoma most often spreads to the lungs and to other bones.The strong treatments needed to control Ewing sarcoma can cause major side effects, both in the short and long term. Your healthcare team can help you manage the side effects that happen during treatment. The team also can give you a list of side effects to watch for in the years after treatment.Ewing sarcoma care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Young age.European ancestry.Advertising & Sponsorship