Eyestrain is a common condition that occurs when your eyes get tired from intense use, such as while driving long distances or staring at computer screens and other digital devices.Eyestrain can be annoying. But it usually isn't serious, and it goes away once you rest your eyes or take other steps to reduce your eye discomfort. In some cases, symptoms of eyestrain can indicate an underlying eye condition that needs treatment.Eyestrain symptoms include:See an eye specialist if self-care steps don't relieve your eyestrain.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesCommon causes of eyestrain include: Extended use of computers and other digital devices is one of the most common causes of eyestrain. The American Optometric Association calls this computer vision syndrome. It's also called digital eyestrain. People who look at screens two or more hours in a row every day have the greatest risk of this condition.Computer use strains eyes more than reading print material because people tend to:In some cases, an underlying eye problem, such as eye muscle imbalance or uncorrected vision, can cause or worsen computer vision syndrome.Some other factors that can make the condition worse include:Eyestrain doesn't have serious or long-term consequences, but it can be aggravating and unpleasant. It can make you tired and reduce your ability to concentrate.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship