Factor V Leiden (FAK-tur five LIDE-n) is a mutation of one of the clotting factors in the blood. This mutation can increase your chance of developing abnormal blood clots, most commonly in your legs or lungs.Most people with factor V Leiden never develop abnormal clots. But in people who do, these abnormal clots can lead to long-term health problems or become life-threatening.Both men and women can have factor V Leiden. Women who carry the factor V Leiden mutation may have an increased tendency to develop blood clots during pregnancy or when taking the hormone estrogen.If you have factor V Leiden and have developed blood clots, anticoagulant medications can lessen your risk of developing additional blood clots and help you avoid potentially serious complications.The factor V Leiden mutation does not itself cause any symptoms. Since factor V Leiden is a risk for developing blood clots in the leg or lungs, the first indication that you have the disorder may be the development of an abnormal blood clot.Some clots do no damage and disappear on their own. Others can be life-threatening. Symptoms of a blood clot depend on what part of your body is affected.This is known as deep vein thrombosis (DVT), which most commonly occurs in the legs. A DVT may not cause any symptoms. If signs and symptoms do occur, they can include:Known as a pulmonary embolism, this occurs when a portion of a DVT breaks free and travels through the right side of your heart to your lung, where it blocks blood flow. This can be a life-threatening situation. Signs and symptoms may include:Seek medical attention immediately if you have signs or symptoms of either a DVT or a pulmonary embolism.If you have factor V Leiden, you inherited either one copy or, rarely, two copies of the defective gene. Inheriting one copy slightly increases your risk of developing blood clots. Inheriting two copies — one from each parent — significantly increases your risk of developing blood clots.A family history of factor V Leiden increases your risk of inheriting the disorder. The disorder is most common in people who are white and of European descent.People who have inherited factor V Leiden from only one parent have a 5 percent chance of developing an abnormal blood clot by age 65. Factors that increase this risk include:Factor V Leiden can cause blood clots in the legs (deep vein thrombosis) and lungs (pulmonary embolism). These blood clots can be life-threatening.Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Blood Cancers & Disorders support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.53 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 60 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 107 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Two faulty genes.Immobility.Estrogens.Surgeries or injuries.Non-O blood type.Advertising & Sponsorship