Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is a genetic autoinflammatory disorder that causes recurrent fevers and painful inflammation of your abdomen, chest and joints.Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is an inherited disorder that usually occurs in people of Mediterranean origin — including those of Jewish, Arab, Armenian, Turkish, North African, Greek or Italian ancestry. But it can affect people in any ethnic group.FMF is typically diagnosed during childhood. While there's no cure for this disorder, you may be able to relieve or even prevent signs and symptoms of FMF by following your treatment plan. Signs and symptoms of familial Mediterranean fever usually begin during childhood. They occur in bouts called attacks that last 1-3 days. Arthritic attacks may last for weeks or months.Signs and symptoms of FMF attacks vary, but can include:The attacks generally resolve spontaneously after a few days. Between attacks, you'll likely feel back to your typical health. Symptom-free periods may be as short as a few days or as long as several years.In some people, the first sign of FMF is amyloidosis. With amyloidosis, the protein amyloid A, which is not typically found in the body, builds up in organs — especially the kidneys — causing inflammation and interfering with their function.See your health care provider if you or your child has a sudden fever accompanied by pain in the abdomen, chest and joints.Familial Mediterranean fever is caused by a gene change (mutation) that's passed from parents to children. The gene change affects the function of an immune system protein called pyrin, causing problems in regulating inflammation in the body.In people with FMF, change occurs in a gene called MEFV. Many different changes in MEFV are linked to FMF. Some changes may cause very severe cases, while others may result in milder signs and symptoms.It's unclear what exactly triggers attacks, but they may occur with emotional stress, menstruation, exposure to cold, and physical stress such as illness or injury.Factors that may increase the risk of familial Mediterranean fever include:Complications can occur if familial Mediterranean fever isn't treated. Inflammation can lead to complications such as:Nov 11, 2021CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.