Fecal incontinence is not being able to control bowel movements. Stool leaks from the rectum without warning. Fecal incontinence ranges from an occasional leakage of stool while passing gas to a complete loss of bowel control. Fecal incontinence is sometimes called bowel incontinence. Common causes of fecal incontinence include diarrhea, constipation, and muscle or nerve damage. The muscle or nerve damage may be associated with aging or with giving birth.Whatever the cause, fecal incontinence can be difficult to discuss. But don't shy away from talking to your doctor about this common problem. Treatments can improve fecal incontinence and your quality of life.Fecal incontinence may occur during an occasional bout of diarrhea. But for some people, fecal incontinence happens a lot. People with this condition may not be able to stop the urge to defecate. It may come on so suddenly that you can't make it to the toilet in time. This is called urge incontinence.Another type of fecal incontinence occurs in people who are not aware of the need to pass stool. This is called passive incontinence.Fecal incontinence may happen with other bowel problems, such as:See your health care provider if you or your child develops fecal incontinence. This is especially important if it happens a lot, is severe or causes emotional distress. Often, people are too embarrassed to tell a provider about fecal incontinence. But the sooner you're evaluated, the sooner you may find some relief from your symptoms.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesFor many people, there is more than one cause of fecal incontinence.Causes can include:A number of factors may increase your risk of developing fecal incontinence, including:Complications of fecal incontinence may include:Depending on the cause, it may be possible to improve or prevent fecal incontinence. These actions may help:Fecal incontinence care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Muscle damage.Nerve damage.Constipation.Diarrhea.Hemorrhoids.Loss of storage capacity in the rectum.Surgery.Rectal prolapse.Rectocele.Age.Being female.Nerve damage.Dementia.Physical disability.Emotional distress.Skin irritation.Reduce constipation.Control diarrhea.Do not strain.Advertising & Sponsorship