The term "fetal macrosomia" is used to describe a newborn who's much larger than average.A baby who is diagnosed as having fetal macrosomia weighs more than 8 pounds, 13 ounces (4,000 grams), regardless of his or her gestational age. About 9% of babies worldwide weigh more than 8 pounds, 13 ounces.Risks associated with fetal macrosomia increase greatly when birth weight is more than 9 pounds, 15 ounces (4,500 grams).Fetal macrosomia may complicate vaginal delivery and can put the baby at risk of injury during birth. Fetal macrosomia also puts the baby at increased risk of health problems after birth.Fetal macrosomia can be difficult to detect and diagnose during pregnancy. Signs and symptoms include:Excessive amniotic fluid (polyhydramnios). Having too much amniotic fluid — the fluid that surrounds and protects a baby during pregnancy — might be a sign that your baby is larger than average. The amount of amniotic fluid reflects your baby's urine output, and a larger baby produces more urine. Some conditions that cause a baby to be larger might also increase his or her urine output. Fundal height is the distance from the pubic bone to the top of the uterus measured in centimeters. After 24 weeks of pregnancy, fundal height often matches the number of weeks you've been pregnant. In polyhydramnios, excessive amniotic fluid accumulates in the uterus during pregnancy. Mild cases of polyhydramnios may go away on their own. Severe cases may require treatment. Genetic factors and maternal conditions such as obesity or diabetes can cause fetal macrosomia. Rarely, a baby might have a medical condition that makes him or her grow faster and larger.Sometimes it's unknown what causes a baby to be larger than average.Many factors might increase the risk of fetal macrosomia — some you can control, but others you can't.For example:Maternal diabetes. Fetal macrosomia is more likely if you had diabetes before pregnancy (pre-gestational diabetes) or if you develop diabetes during pregnancy (gestational diabetes).If your diabetes isn't well controlled, your baby is likely to have larger shoulders and greater amounts of body fat than would a baby whose mother doesn't have diabetes.Fetal macrosomia is more likely to be a result of maternal diabetes, obesity or weight gain during pregnancy than other causes. If these risk factors aren't present and fetal macrosomia is suspected, it's possible that your baby might have a rare medical condition that affects fetal growth.If a rare medical condition is suspected, your health care provider might recommend prenatal diagnostic tests and perhaps a visit with a genetic counselor, depending on the test results.Fetal macrosomia poses health risks for you and your baby — both during pregnancy and after childbirth.Possible maternal complications of fetal macrosomia might include:Possible complications of fetal macrosomia for your baby might include:Metabolic syndrome. If your baby is diagnosed with fetal macrosomia, he or she is at risk of developing metabolic syndrome during childhood.Metabolic syndrome is a cluster of conditions — increased blood pressure, a high blood sugar level, excess body fat around the waist and abnormal cholesterol levels — that occur together, increasing the risk of heart disease, stroke and diabetes.Further research is needed to determine whether these effects might increase the risk of adult diabetes, obesity and heart disease.You might not be able to prevent fetal macrosomia, but you can promote a healthy pregnancy. Research shows that exercising during pregnancy and eating a low-glycemic diet can reduce the risk of macrosomia.For example:Jun 03, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.