Fibrocystic breast changes lead to the development of fluid-filled round or oval sacs, called cysts. The cysts can make breasts feel tender, lumpy or ropy. They feel distinct from other breast tissue.Fibrocystic breasts are composed of tissue that feels lumpy or ropelike in texture. Doctors call this nodular or glandular breast tissue.It's not at all uncommon to have fibrocystic breasts or experience fibrocystic breast changes. In fact, medical professionals have stopped using the term "fibrocystic breast disease" and now simply refer to "fibrocystic breasts" or "fibrocystic breast changes" because having fibrocystic breasts isn't a disease. Breast changes that fluctuate with the menstrual cycle and have a ropelike texture are considered normal.Fibrocystic breast changes don't always cause symptoms. Some people experience breast pain, tenderness and lumpiness — especially in the upper, outer area of the breasts. Breast symptoms tend to be most bothersome just before menstruation and get better afterward. Simple self-care measures can usually relieve discomfort associated with fibrocystic breasts.Signs and symptoms of fibrocystic breasts may include:Fibrocystic breast changes occur most often between 30 and 50 years of age. These changes happen rarely after menopause unless you're taking hormone replacement medicine such as estrogen or progesterone.Most fibrocystic breast changes are normal. However, make an appointment with your doctor if:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Get the latest information from our Mayo Clinic experts on women’s health topics, serious and complex conditions, wellness and more. Click to view a preview and subscribe below.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesEach breast contains 15 to 20 lobes of glandular tissue, arranged like the petals of a daisy. The lobes are further divided into smaller lobules that produce milk for breastfeeding. Small tubes, called ducts, conduct the milk to a reservoir that lies just beneath your nipple.The exact cause of fibrocystic breast changes isn't known, but experts suspect that reproductive hormones — especially estrogen — play a role.Fluctuating hormone levels during the menstrual cycle can cause breast discomfort and areas of lumpy breast tissue that feel tender, sore and swollen. Fibrocystic breast changes tend to be more bothersome before your menstrual period and ease up after your period begins.When examined under a microscope, fibrocystic breast tissue includes distinct components such as:Having fibrocystic breasts doesn't increase your risk of breast cancer.Fibrocystic breasts care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship