A fibroadenoma (fy-broe-ad-uh-NO-muh) is a solid breast lump. This breast lump is not cancer. A fibroadenoma happens most often between ages 15 and 35. But it can be found at any age in anyone who has periods.A fibroadenoma often causes no pain. It can feel firm, smooth and rubbery. It has a round shape. It might feel like a pea in the breast. Or it may feel flat like a coin. When touched, it moves easily within the breast tissue.Fibroadenomas are common breast lumps. If you have a fibroadenoma, your health care provider may tell you to watch for changes in its size or feel. You may need a biopsy to check the lump or surgery to remove it. Many fibroadenomas need no further treatment.A fibroadenoma is a solid breast lump that often causes no pain. It is:A fibroadenoma often grows slowly. The average size is about 1 inch (2.5 centimeters). A fibroadenoma can get bigger over time. It may be tender or cause soreness a few days before your period. A large fibroadenoma may hurt when you touch it. But most often, this type of breast lump causes no pain.You can have a single fibroadenoma or more than one fibroadenoma. They can occur in one or both breasts.Some fibroadenomas shrink over time. Most fibroadenomas in adolescents shrink over many months to a few years. They then disappear. Fibroadenomas may also change shape over time.Fibroadenomas may get bigger during pregnancy. They might shrink after menopause.Healthy breast tissue often feels lumpy. Make an appointment with your health care provider if you:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Get the latest information from our Mayo Clinic experts on women’s health topics, serious and complex conditions, wellness and more. Click to view a preview and subscribe below.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe cause of fibroadenomas is not known. They might be related to hormones that control your periods.Less common types of fibroadenomas and related breast lumps may not act the same as typical fibroadenomas. These types of breast lumps include:Common fibroadenomas do not affect your risk of breast cancer. But your risk might go up a bit if you have a complex fibroadenoma or a phyllodes tumor.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Complex fibroadenomas.Giant fibroadenomas.Phyllodes tumors.Advertising & Sponsorship