In fibromuscular dysplasia, the muscle and fiber tissues in the arteries thicken, causing the arteries to narrow. This is called stenosis. Narrowed arteries can reduce blood flow to the organs, causing organ damage. The artery to the kidney is called the renal artery. Fibromuscular dysplasia of the renal artery is shown here, with a "string of beads" appearance.Fibromuscular dysplasia is a condition that causes the medium-sized arteries in the body to narrow and grow larger. Narrowed arteries can reduce blood flow and affect how body organs work.Fibromuscular dysplasia is most often seen in the arteries leading to the kidneys and brain. But it also can affect arteries in the legs, heart, belly area and, rarely, the arms. More than one artery can be involved.Treatments are available to control symptoms and help prevent complications, such as stroke. But there is no cure for fibromuscular dysplasia.Symptoms of fibromuscular dysplasia depend on which artery or arteries are affected. Some people don't have any symptoms.If the arteries to the kidneys are affected, common symptoms include:If the arteries affected supply blood to the brain, symptoms might include:If you have fibromuscular dysplasia, get medical help immediately if you have symptoms of a stroke, such as:If you are concerned about your risk of fibromuscular dysplasia, make an appointment for a health checkup. The condition can rarely run in families. But there's no genetic test for fibromuscular dysplasia.The cause of fibromuscular dysplasia is not known. Changes in genes might cause the condition.Because the condition is more common in women than men, researchers think female hormones also may play a role. But exactly how is unclear. Fibromuscular dysplasia is not linked to women's use of birth control pills.Things that increase the risk of fibromuscular dysplasia include:Possible complications of fibromuscular dysplasia include:Fibromuscular dysplasia care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart & Blood Health support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.346 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 58 Replies Thu, Jun 20, 2024 106 Replies Wed, Jun 19, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Sex.Age.Smoking.High blood pressure.Tears in the artery walls.Bulge or ballooning of an artery.Stroke.Advertising & Sponsorship