Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) results from scar tissue that develops in the glomeruli. Glomeruli are tiny structures within the kidney that filter waste products from the blood to create urine. A healthy glomerulus is shown on the left. When scar tissue develops in a glomerulus, kidney function gets worse (shown right).Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) is a disease in which scar tissue develops on the glomeruli, the small parts of the kidneys that filter waste from the blood. FSGS can be caused by a variety of conditions.FSGS is a serious condition that can lead to kidney failure, which can only be treated with dialysis or kidney transplant. Treatment options for FSGS depend on the type you have.Types of FSGS include:Symptoms of focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) might include:See a healthcare professional if you have any of the symptoms of FSGS.Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) can be caused by a variety of conditions, such as diabetes, sickle cell disease, other kidney diseases and obesity. Infections and damage from illicit drugs, medicines or toxins also can cause it. Gene changes passed through families, called inherited gene changes, can cause a rare form of FSGS. Sometimes there's no known cause.Factors that can raise the risk of focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) include:Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) may lead to other health concerns, also called complications, including:Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Transplants support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.1606 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 15 Replies Fri, Jun 21, 2024 100 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Primary FSGS.Secondary FSGS.Genetic FSGS.Unknown FSGS.Medical conditions that can damage the kidneys.Certain infections.Gene changes.Nephrotic syndrome.Kidney failure.Advertising & Sponsorship