Folliculitis is a common skin condition that happens when hair follicles become inflamed. It's often caused by an infection with bacteria. At first it may look like small pimples around the tiny pockets from where each hair grows (hair follicles).The condition can be itchy, sore and embarrassing. The infection can spread and turn into crusty sores.Mild folliculitis will likely heal without scarring in a few days with basic self-care. More-serious or repeat infections may need prescription medicine. Left untreated, severe infections can cause permanent hair loss and scarring.Certain types of folliculitis are known as hot tub rash and barber's itch.Folliculitis signs and symptoms include: Superficial folliculitis can look like a pus-filled bump. Hot tub folliculitis causes round, itchy bumps that may later develop into small pus-filled blisters. The rash is likely to be worse in areas where your swimsuit holds water against the skin. Razor bumps affect people with curly beards. The condition is also called pseudofolliculitis barbae. It develops when shaved hairs curve back into the skin, leading to inflammation. A carbuncle is a cluster of boils painful, pus-filled bumps that form a connected area of infection under the skin. The two main types of folliculitis are superficial and deep. The superficial type involves part of the follicle, and the deep type involves the entire follicle and is usually more severe.Types of folliculitis, with the most common listed first, include:Make an appointment with your health care provider if your condition is widespread or the symptoms don't go away after a week or two of self-care measures. You may need a prescription-strength antibiotic or antifungal medication to help control the condition.Seek immediate medical care if you experience signs of a spreading infection. These include a sudden increase in redness or pain, fever, chills, and a feeling of being unwell (malaise).Folliculitis is often caused when hair follicles are infected with bacteria, commonly Staphylococcus aureus (staph). It may also be caused by viruses, fungi, parasites, medications or physical injury. Sometimes the cause isn't known. When hair follicles are damaged, they may be invaded by viruses, bacteria and fungi. This can lead to development of folliculitis. Superficial folliculitis affects the upper part of the hair follicle and the skin around the follicle. Deep folliculitis affects more of the follicle or even all of it. Anyone can develop folliculitis. Certain factors increase the risk of getting it, including:Possible complications of folliculitis include:You can try to prevent folliculitis by using these tips:Aug 31, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.