Food poisoning, a type of foodborne illness, is a sickness people get from something they ate or drank. The causes are germs or other harmful things in the food or beverage.Symptoms of food poisoning often include upset stomach, diarrhea and vomiting. Symptoms usually start within hours or several days of eating the food. Most people have mild illness and get better without treatment.Sometimes food poisoning causes severe illness or complications.Symptoms vary depending on what is causing the illness. They may begin within a few hours or a few weeks depending on the cause.Common symptoms are:Less often food poisoning affects the nervous system and can cause severe disease. Symptoms may include:Vomiting and diarrhea can quickly cause low levels of body fluids, also called dehydration, in infants and children. This can cause serious illness in infants.Call your child's health care provider if your child's symptoms include vomiting and diarrhea and any of the following:Adults should see a health care provider or get emergency care if the following occur:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesMany germs or harmful things, called contaminants, can cause foodborne illnesses. Food or drink that carries a contaminant is called "contaminated." Food can be contaminated with any of the following:The term "food poisoning" is commonly used to describe all foodborne illnesses. A health care provider might use these terms to be more specific:Food can be contaminated at any point from the farm or fishery to the table. The problem can begin during growing, harvesting or catching, processing, storing, shipping, or preparing.Food can be contaminated any place it's handled, including the home, because of:The following table shows common causes of foodborne illnesses, the time from exposure to the beginning of symptoms and common sources of contamination.Bacteria that cause foodborne illnesses can also be found in swimming pools, lakes, ponds, rivers and seawater. Also, some bacteria, such as E. coli, may be spread by exposure to animals carrying the disease.Anyone can get food poisoning. Some people are more likely to get sick or have more-serious disease or complications. These people include:In most healthy adults, complications are uncommon. They can include the following.The most common complication is dehydration. This a severe loss of water and salts and minerals. Both vomiting and diarrhea can cause dehydration.Most healthy adults can drink enough fluids to prevent dehydration. Children, older adults, and people with weakened immune systems or other illnesses may not be able to replace the fluids they've lost. They are more likely to become dehydrated.People who become dehydrated may need to get fluids directly into the bloodstream at the hospital. Severe dehydration can cause organ damage, other severe disease and death if not treated.Some contaminants can cause more widespread disease in the body, also called systemic disease or infection. This is more common in people who are older, have weakened immune systems or other medical conditions. Systemic infections from foodborne bacteria may cause:Illness from the listeria bacteria during pregnancy can result in:Rare complications include conditions that may develop after food poisoning, including:To prevent food poisoning at home:Food poisoning is especially serious during pregnancies and for young children, older adults and people with weakened immune systems. These illnesses may be life-threatening. These individuals should avoid the following foods:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Poor handwashing.Not disinfecting cooking or eating areas.Improper storage.Blood clots in the kidneys.Bacteria in the bloodstream.Meningitis.Sepsis.Arthritis.Irritable bowel syndrome.Guillain-Barre syndrome.Breathing difficulties.Handwashing.Wash fruits and vegetables.Wash kitchen utensils thoroughly.Don't eat raw or undercooked meat or fish.Refrigerate or freeze leftovers.Cook leftovers safely.Throw it out when in doubt.Throw out moldy food.Clean your refrigerator.Advertising & Sponsorship