Foot drop, sometimes called drop foot, is a general term for difficulty lifting the front part of the foot. If you have foot drop, the front of your foot might drag on the ground when you walk.Foot drop isn't a disease. Rather, it is a sign of an underlying neurological, muscular or anatomical problem.Sometimes foot drop is temporary, but it can be permanent. If you have foot drop, you might need to wear a brace on your ankle and foot to support the foot and hold it in position.Foot drop makes it difficult to lift the front part of the foot, so it might drag on the floor when you walk. To help the foot clear the floor, a person with foot drop may raise the thigh more than usual when walking, as though climbing stairs. This unusual kind of walking, called steppage gait, might cause the foot to slap down onto the floor with each step. In some cases, the skin on the top of the foot and toes feels numb.Depending on the cause, foot drop can affect one or both feet.If your toes drag on the floor when you walk, consult your doctor.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesFoot drop is caused by weakness or paralysis of the muscles involved in lifting the front part of the foot. Causes of foot drop might include:Nerve injury. The most common cause of foot drop is compression of a nerve in the leg that controls the muscles involved in lifting the foot. This nerve is called the peroneal nerve. A serious knee injury can lead to the nerve being compressed. It can also be injured during hip or knee replacement surgery, which may cause foot drop.A nerve root injury — "pinched nerve" — in the spine also can cause foot drop. People who have diabetes are more susceptible to nerve disorders, which are associated with foot drop.The peroneal nerve controls the muscles that lift the foot. This nerve runs near the surface of the skin on the side of the knee closest to the hand. Activities that compress this nerve can increase the risk of foot drop. Examples include:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Nerve injury.Muscle or nerve disorders.Brain and spinal cord disorders.Leg crossing.Prolonged kneeling.Wearing a leg cast.Advertising & Sponsorship