Frostbite is an injury caused by freezing of the skin and underlying tissues. The early stage of frostbite is called frostnip. It causes a cold feeling followed by numbness. As frostbite gets worse, the affected skin may change color and become hard or waxy-looking.Exposed skin is at risk of frostbite in conditions that are freezing cold and windy or wet. Frostbite also can occur on skin covered by gloves or other clothing.Mild frostbite gets better with rewarming. Seek medical attention for anything more serious than mild frostbite because the condition can cause permanent damage to skin, muscle, bone and other tissue.Skin without cold damage (1) has no change in color or texture. Frostnip (2) is the early stage of frostbite. It causes a slight change in skin color and a cold feeling followed by numbness. Frostnip doesn't injure the skin and can be treated with first aid. With superficial frostbite (3), the skin feels warm. A fluid-filled blister may form 12 to 36 hours after rewarming. With deep frostbite (4), skin changes worsen and large blisters may appear 24 to 48 hours after rewarming. Tissue may turn black and hard as it dies.Symptoms of frostbite include:Frostbite is most common on the fingers, toes, ears, cheeks, penis, chin and tip of the nose. Because of numbness, you may not notice you have frostbite until someone points it out. Changes in the color of the affected area might be difficult to see on brown and Black skin.Frostbite occurs in several stages:Other than frostnip, frostbite injuries need to be checked by a healthcare professional to find out how serious they are.Seek emergency care for:People with frostbite also might have hypothermia. Shivering, slurred speech, and being sleepy or clumsy are symptoms of hypothermia. In babies, symptoms are cold skin, a change in skin color and very low energy. Hypothermia is a serious condition in which the body loses heat faster than it can be produced.While you wait for emergency medical help or an appointment with a healthcare professional, take these steps as needed:The most common cause of frostbite is exposure to freezing cold. The risk rises if the weather also is wet and windy. Frostbite also can be caused by direct contact with ice, freezing metals or very cold liquids.Risk factors for frostbite include:Complications of frostbite include:Frostbite can be prevented. Here are tips to help you stay safe and warm.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Frostnip.Mild to moderate frostbite.Deep frostbite.Limit time outdoors when it's freezing cold and wet or windy.Dress in loose layers.Wear a hat or headband made for cold weather.Wear mittens.Wear socks and sock liners.Watch for symptoms of frostbite.Plan to protect yourself.Don't drink alcohol if you plan to be outdoors in cold weather.Eat well-balanced meals and stay hydrated.Keep moving.Advertising & Sponsorship