Functional neurologic disorder — a newer and broader term that includes what some people call conversion disorder — features nervous system (neurological) symptoms that can't be explained by a neurological disease or other medical condition. However, the symptoms are real and cause significant distress or problems functioning.Signs and symptoms vary, depending on the type of functional neurologic disorder, and may include specific patterns. Typically, this disorder affects your movement or your senses, such as the ability to walk, swallow, see or hear. Symptoms can vary in severity and may come and go or be persistent. However, you can't intentionally produce or control your symptoms.The cause of functional neurologic disorder is unknown. The condition may be triggered by a neurological disorder or by a reaction to stress or psychological or physical trauma, but that's not always the case. Functional neurologic disorder is related to how the brain functions, rather than damage to the brain's structure (such as from a stroke, multiple sclerosis, infection or injury).Early diagnosis and treatment, especially education about the condition, can help with recovery.Signs and symptoms of functional neurologic disorder may vary, depending on the type of functional neurological symptoms, and they're significant enough to cause impairment and warrant medical evaluation. Symptoms can affect body movement and function and the senses.Signs and symptoms that affect body movement and function may include:Signs and symptoms that affect the senses may include:Seek medical attention for signs and symptoms that concern you or interfere with your ability to function. If the underlying cause is a neurological disease or another medical condition, quick diagnosis and treatment may be important. If the diagnosis is functional neurologic disorder, treatment may improve the symptoms and help prevent future problems.The exact cause of functional neurologic disorder is unknown. Theories regarding what happens in the brain to result in symptoms are complex and involve multiple mechanisms that may differ, depending on the type of functional neurological symptoms.Basically, parts of the brain that control the functioning of your muscles and senses may be involved, even though no disease or abnormality exists.Symptoms of functional neurologic disorder may appear suddenly after a stressful event, or with emotional or physical trauma. Other triggers may include changes or disruptions in how the brain functions at the structural, cellular or metabolic level. But the trigger for symptoms can't always be identified.Factors that may increase your risk of functional neurologic disorder include:Females may be more likely than males to develop functional neurologic disorder.Some symptoms of functional neurologic disorder, particularly if not treated, can result in substantial disability and poor quality of life, similar to problems caused by medical conditions or disease.Functional neurologic disorder may be associated with:Jan 11, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.