Galactorrhea (guh-lack-toe-REE-uh) is a milky nipple discharge unrelated to the usual milk production of breastfeeding. Galactorrhea itself isn't a disease, but it could be a sign of another medical condition. It usually happens in women, even those who have never had children or who have gone through menopause. But galactorrhea can happen in men and babies.Excessive breast stimulation, medicine side effects or conditions of the pituitary gland all may contribute to galactorrhea. Often, galactorrhea results from increased levels of prolactin, the hormone that stimulates milk production.Sometimes, the cause of galactorrhea can't be determined. The condition may go away on its own.Symptoms linked to galactorrhea include:If you have a persistent, spontaneous milky nipple discharge from one or both of your breasts and you're not pregnant or breastfeeding, make an appointment to see your healthcare professional.If breast stimulation — such as excessive nipple manipulation during sexual activity — triggers nipple discharge from multiple ducts, you have little cause for worry. The discharge probably doesn't signal anything serious. This discharge often goes away on its own. If you have persistent discharge that doesn't go away, make an appointment with your healthcare professional to get it checked out.Nonmilky nipple discharge — particularly bloody, yellow or clear spontaneous discharge that comes from one duct or is associated with a lump you can feel — requires prompt medical attention. It may be a sign of an underlying breast cancer.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe pituitary gland and the hypothalamus are in the brain. They control hormone production.Galactorrhea often results from having too much prolactin in the body. Prolactin is the hormone responsible for milk production after a baby is born. Prolactin is made by the pituitary gland, a small bean-shaped gland at the base of the brain that secretes and regulates several hormones.Possible causes of galactorrhea include:Sometimes healthcare professionals can't find a cause for galactorrhea. This is called idiopathic galactorrhea. It may mean that your breast tissue is particularly sensitive to the milk-producing hormone prolactin in your blood. If you have increased sensitivity to prolactin, even normal prolactin levels can lead to galactorrhea.In males, galactorrhea may be associated with testosterone deficiency, called male hypogonadism. This usually happens along with breast enlargement or tenderness, called gynecomastia. Erectile dysfunction and a lack of sexual desire also are associated with testosterone deficiency.Galactorrhea sometimes occurs in newborns. High maternal estrogen levels cross the placenta into the baby's blood. This can cause enlargement of the baby's breast tissue, which may be associated with a milky nipple discharge. This milky discharge is temporary and goes away on its own. If the discharge is persistent, the newborn should be evaluated by a healthcare professional.Anything that triggers the release of the hormone prolactin can increase the risk of galactorrhea. Risk factors include:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship