Ganglion cysts are lumps that most commonly develop in the wrist. They're typically round or oval and are filled with a jellylike fluid.Ganglion cysts are lumps that most often appear along the tendons or joints of wrists or hands. They also can occur in ankles and feet. Ganglion cysts are typically round or oval and are filled with a jellylike fluid. They are not cancer.Small ganglion cysts can be pea-sized. They can change size. Ganglion cysts can be painful if they press on a nearby nerve. Sometimes they affect joint movement.For a ganglion cyst that causes problems, having a health care provider drain the cyst with a needle might be an option. So might removing the cyst surgically. But if there are no symptoms, no treatment is necessary. Often, the cysts grow and shrink. Some go away on their own.These are common features of ganglion cysts:See a health care provider if you notice a lump or pain in your wrist, hand, ankle or foot. You can get a diagnosis and find out whether you need treatment.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesNo one knows what causes a ganglion cyst. It grows out of a joint or the lining of a tendon and looks like a tiny water balloon on a stalk. Inside the cyst is a thick fluid like the fluid found in joints or around tendons.Factors that may increase the risk of ganglion cysts include:Ganglion cyst care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Location.Shape and size.Pain.Sex and age.Osteoarthritis.Joint or tendon injury.Advertising & Sponsorship