Gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding is a sign of a disorder in the digestive tract. The blood often shows up in stool or vomit but isn't always obvious. Stool may look black or tarry. Bleeding can range from mild to severe and can be life-threatening.Imaging technology or an endoscopic investigation can usually locate the cause of the bleeding. Treatment depends on the where the bleeding is located and how severe it is.Symptoms of GI bleeding can be easy to see, called overt, or not so obvious, known as occult. Symptoms depend on the rate of bleeding as well as the location of the bleed, which can be anywhere on the GI tract, from where it starts — the mouth — to where it ends — the anus.Overt bleeding might show up as:With occult bleeding, you might have:If your bleeding starts suddenly and gets worse quickly, you could go into shock. Symptoms of shock include:If you have symptoms of shock, you or someone else should call 911 or your local emergency medical number. If you're vomiting blood, see blood in your stools or have black, tarry stools, seek immediate medical care. If you notice any symptoms of GI bleeding, make an appointment with your doctor.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesEsophageal varices are enlarged veins in the esophagus. They're often due to obstructed blood flow through the portal vein, which carries blood from the intestine to the liver.Hemorrhoids are swollen veins in your lower rectum. Hemorrhoids inside the rectum are usually painless but tend to bleed. Hemorrhoids outside the rectum may cause pain.Gastrointestinal bleeding can happen either in the upper or lower gastrointestinal tract.Causes of upper GI bleeding can include:Causes can include:A gastrointestinal bleed can cause:To help prevent a GI bleed:Gastrointestinal bleeding care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Colorectal Cancer support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.57 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 87 Replies Mon, Jun 17, 2024 35 Replies Wed, Jun 12, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Peptic ulcer.Tears in the lining of the tube that connects your throat to your stomach, called the esophagus.Enlarged veins in the esophagus, called esophageal varices.Portal hypertensive gastropathy.Esophagitis.Abnormal blood vessels.Hiatal hernia.Growths.Diverticular disease.Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).Proctitis.Tumors.Colon polyps.Hemorrhoids.Anal fissures.Advertising & Sponsorship