Acid reflux happens when the sphincter muscle at the lower end of the esophagus relaxes at the wrong time, allowing stomach acid to back up into the esophagus. This can cause heartburn and other symptoms. Frequent or constant reflux can lead to GERD.Gastroesophageal reflux disease is a condition in which stomach acid repeatedly flows back up into the tube connecting the mouth and stomach, called the esophagus. It's often called GERD for short. This backwash is known as acid reflux, and it can irritate the lining of the esophagus.Many people experience acid reflux now and then. However, when acid reflux happens repeatedly over time, it can cause GERD.Most people can manage the discomfort of GERD with lifestyle changes and medicines. And though it's uncommon, some may need surgery to help with symptoms.Common symptoms of GERD include:If you have nighttime acid reflux, you also might experience:Seek medical help right away if you have chest pain, especially if you also have shortness of breath, or jaw or arm pain. These may be symptoms of a heart attack.Make an appointment with a healthcare professional if you:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care.If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.Please, try again in a couple of minutesGERD is caused by frequent acid reflux or reflux of nonacidic content from the stomach.When you swallow, a circular band of muscle around the bottom of the esophagus, called the lower esophageal sphincter, relaxes to allow food and liquid to flow into the stomach. Then the sphincter closes again.If the sphincter does not relax as is typical or it weakens, stomach acid can flow back into the esophagus. This constant backwash of acid irritates the lining of the esophagus, often causing it to become inflamed.A hiatal hernia occurs when the upper part of the stomach bulges through the diaphragm into the chest cavity.Conditions that can increase the risk of GERD include:Factors that can aggravate acid reflux include:Over time, long-lasting inflammation in the esophagus can cause:Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Inflammation of the tissue in the esophagus, known as esophagitis.Narrowing of the esophagus, called an esophageal stricture.Precancerous changes to the esophagus, known as Barrett esophagus.Advertising & Sponsorship