Genital herpes is a common sexually transmitted infection (STI). The herpes simplex virus (HSV) causes genital herpes. Genital herpes can often be spread by skin-to-skin contact during sexual activity.Some people infected with the virus may have very mild symptoms or no symptoms. They can still able to spread the virus. Other people have pain, itching and sores around the genitals, anus or mouth.There is no cure for genital herpes. Symptoms often show up again after the first outbreak. Medicine can ease symptoms. It also lowers the risk of infecting others. Condoms can help prevent the spread of a genital herpes infection.Sores associated with genital herpes can be small bumps, blisters or open sores. Scabs eventually form and the sores heal, but they tend to recur.Most people infected with HSV don't know they have it. They may have no symptoms or have very mild symptoms.Symptoms start about 2 to 12 days after exposure to the virus. They may include:During the first outbreak, you may commonly have flu-like symptoms such as:Sores appear where the infection enters the body. You can spread the infection by touching a sore and then rubbing or scratching another area of your body. That includes your fingers or eyes.Sore can develop on or in the:After the first outbreak of genital herpes, symptoms often appear again. These are called recurrent outbreaks or recurrent episodes.How often recurrent outbreaks happen varies widely. You'll usually have the most outbreaks the first year after infection. They may appear less often over time. Your symptoms during recurrent outbreaks usually don't last as long and aren't as severe as the first.You may have warning signs a few hours or days before a new outbreak starts. These are called prodromal symptoms. They include:If you suspect you have genital herpes, or any other STI, see your health care provider.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesGenital herpes is caused by two types of herpes simplex virus. These types include herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2) and herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1). People with HSV infections can pass along the virus even when they have no visible symptoms.HSV-2 is the most common cause of genital herpes. The virus can be present:The virus moves from one person to another during sexual activity.HSV-1 is a version of the virus that causes cold sores or fever blisters. People may be exposed to HSV-1 as children due to close skin-to-skin contact with someone infected.A person with HSV-1 in tissues of the mouth can pass the virus to the genitals of a sexual partner during oral sex. The newly caught infection is a genital herpes infection.Recurrent outbreaks of genital herpes caused by HSV-1 are often less frequent than outbreaks caused by HSV-2.Neither HSV-1 nor HSV-2 survives well at room temperature. So the virus is not likely to spread through surfaces, such as a faucet handle or a towel. But kissing or sharing a drinking glass or silverware might spread the virus.A higher risk of getting genital herpes is linked to:Complications associated with genital herpes may include:Prevention of genital herpes is the same as preventing other sexually transmitted infections.If you are pregnant and know you have genital herpes, tell your health care provider. If you think you might have genital herpes, ask your provider if you can be tested for it.Your provider may recommend that you take herpes antiviral medicines late in pregnancy. This is to try to prevent an outbreak around the time of delivery. If you have an outbreak when you go into labor, your provider may suggest a cesarean section. That is a surgery to remove the baby from your uterus. It lowers the risk of passing the virus to your baby.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Contact with genitals through oral, vaginal or anal sex.Having sex with multiple partners.Having a partner who has the disease but is not taking medicine to treat it.Certain groups within the population.Other sexually transmitted infections.Newborn infection.Internal inflammatory disease.Finger infection.Eye infection.Swelling of the brain.Infection of internal organs.Advertising & Sponsorship