Gingivitis is a common and mild form of gum disease, also called periodontal disease. It causes irritation, redness, swelling and bleeding of your gingiva, which is the part of your gum around the base of your teeth. It's important to take gingivitis seriously and treat it promptly. Gingivitis does not cause bone loss. But left untreated, it can lead to a much more serious gum disease, called periodontitis, and tooth loss.The most common cause of gingivitis is not keeping your teeth and gums clean and healthy. Good oral health habits, such as brushing at least twice a day, flossing daily and getting regular dental checkups, can help prevent and reverse gingivitis.Gingivitis can cause bright or dark red, swollen, tender gums that bleed easily, especially when you brush your teeth.Healthy gums are firm and pale pink. They fit tightly around the teeth. Symptoms of gingivitis include:If you notice any symptoms of gingivitis, schedule an appointment with your dentist as soon as possible. The sooner you seek care, the better your chances of reversing damage from gingivitis and not getting periodontitis. Your dentist may want you to see a periodontist if your symptoms aren't improving. This is a dentist with advanced training who specializes in treating gum diseases.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe most common cause of gingivitis is poor care of teeth and gums, which allows plaque to form on teeth. This causes swelling of the surrounding gum tissues.Here's how plaque can lead to gingivitis:Gingivitis is common, and anyone can develop it. Factors that can increase your risk of gingivitis include:Untreated gingivitis can lead to gum disease that spreads to underlying tissue and bone, called periodontitis. This is a much more serious condition that can lead to tooth loss.Ongoing gum disease may be related to some diseases that affect the entire body, such as respiratory disease, diabetes, coronary artery disease, stroke and rheumatoid arthritis. Some research suggests that the bacteria responsible for periodontitis can enter your bloodstream through gum tissue, possibly affecting your heart, lungs and other parts of your body. But more studies are needed to confirm a link.Trench mouth, also known as necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis or NUG, is a severe form of gingivitis that causes painful, infected, bleeding gums and ulcers. Trench mouth is rare today in developed nations, though it's common in developing countries that have poor nutrition and poor living conditions.To prevent gingivitis:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Plaque forms on your teeth.Plaque turns into tartar.Gingiva becomes irritated and swells.Practice good oral care.Go to the dentist regularly.Take steps to lead a healthy lifestyle.Advertising & Sponsorship