Gliomas begin in the gluey supportive (glial cells) that surround nerve cells in the brain.Glioma is a growth of cells that starts in the brain or spinal cord. The cells in a glioma look similar to healthy brain cells called glial cells. Glial cells surround nerve cells and help them function.As a glioma grows it forms a mass of cells called a tumor. The tumor can grow to press on brain or spinal cord tissue and cause symptoms. Symptoms depend on which part of the brain or spinal cord is affected.There are many types of glioma. Some grow slowly and aren't considered to be cancers. Others are considered cancerous. Another word for cancerous is malignant. Malignant gliomas grow quickly and can invade healthy brain tissue. Some types of glioma happen mostly in adults. Others happen mostly in kids.The type of glioma you have helps your health care team understand how serious your condition is and what treatments might work best. In general, glioma treatment options include surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy and others.Glioma symptoms depend on the location of the glioma. Symptoms also may depend on the type of glioma, its size and how quickly it's growing.Common signs and symptoms of gliomas include:Make an appointment with your health care provider if you have any signs and symptoms that worry you.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and receive the latest on brain tumor treatment, diagnosis and surgery.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You will receive the first brain tumor email in your inbox shortly, which will include information on treatment, diagnosis, surgery and how brain cancer teams at Mayo Clinic approach personalized care.Please, try again in a couple of minutesDoctors aren't sure what causes glioma. It starts when cells in the brain or spinal cord develop changes in their DNA. A cell's DNA contains the instructions that tell a cell what to do.The DNA changes tell the cells to make more cells quickly. The cells continue living when healthy cells would die. This causes too many cells that don't work right. The cells form a mass called a tumor.The tumor can grow to press on nearby nerves and parts of the brain or spinal cord. This leads to glioma symptoms and can cause complications.Some gliomas develop more changes in their DNA that cause them to become brain cancers. The changes tell the cells to invade and destroy healthy brain tissue.In glioma, the tumor cells look similar to healthy brain cells called glial cells. The glial cells surround and support nerve cells in the brain and spinal cord.Things that can increase the risk of glioma include:Researchers haven't found anything you can do to prevent glioma.Glioma care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Brain Tumor support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.172 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 1 Replies Tue, Jun 04, 2024 6 Replies Sun, May 26, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Getting older.Being exposed to radiation.Having a family history of glioma.Advertising & Sponsorship