The kidneys remove waste and extra fluid from the blood through filtering units called nephrons. Each nephron contains a filter, called a glomerulus. Each filter has tiny blood vessels called capillaries. When blood flows into a glomerulus, tiny bits, called molecules, of water, minerals and nutrients, and wastes pass through the capillary walls. Large molecules, such as proteins and red blood cells, do not. The part that's filtered then passes into another part of the nephron called the tubule. The water, nutrients and minerals the body needs are sent back to the bloodstream. The extra water and waste become urine that flows to the bladder.Glomerulonephritis (gloe-MER-u-loe-nuh-FRY-tis) is inflammation of the tiny filters in the kidneys (glomeruli). The excess fluid and waste that glomeruli (gloe-MER-u-lie) remove from the bloodstream exit the body as urine. Glomerulonephritis can come on suddenly (acute) or gradually (chronic).Glomerulonephritis occurs on its own or as part of another disease, such as lupus or diabetes. Severe or prolonged inflammation associated with glomerulonephritis can damage the kidneys. Treatment depends on the type of glomerulonephritis you have.Signs and symptoms of glomerulonephritis may vary depending on whether you have the acute or chronic form and the cause. You may notice no symptoms of chronic disease. Your first indication that something is wrong might come from the results of a routine urine test (urinalysis).Glomerulonephritis signs and symptoms may include:Make an appointment with your health care provider promptly if you have signs or symptoms of glomerulonephritis.Many conditions can cause glomerulonephritis. Sometimes the disease runs in families and sometimes the cause is unknown. Factors that can lead to inflammation of the glomeruli include the following conditions.Infectious diseases can directly or indirectly lead to glomerulonephritis. These infections include:Autoimmune diseases are illnesses caused by the immune system attacking healthy tissues. Autoimmune diseases that may cause glomerulonephritis include:Vasculitis is inflammation of blood vessels. Types of vasculitis that can cause glomerulonephritis include:Some diseases or conditions cause scarring of the glomeruli that results in poor and declining kidney function. These include:Infrequently, chronic glomerulonephritis runs in families. One inherited form, Alport syndrome, also might impair hearing or vision.Glomerulonephritis is associated with certain cancers, such as gastric cancer, lung cancer and chronic lymphocytic leukemia.Some autoimmune diseases are linked with glomerulonephritis.Glomerulonephritis affects the ability of nephrons to filter the bloodstream efficiently. The breakdown in filtering results in:Possible complications of glomerulonephritis include:There may be no way to prevent some forms of glomerulonephritis. However, here are some steps that might be beneficial:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis.Bacterial endocarditis.Viral kidney infections.HIV.Lupus.Goodpasture's syndrome.IgA nephropathy.Polyarteritis.Granulomatosis with polyangiitis.High blood pressure.Diabetic kidney disease (diabetic nephropathy).Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis.Acute kidney failure.Chronic kidney disease.High blood pressure.Nephrotic syndrome.Advertising & Sponsorship