A goiter (GOI-tur) is the irregular growth of the thyroid gland. The thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland located at the base of the neck just below the Adam's apple.A goiter may be an overall enlargement of the thyroid, or it may be the result of irregular cell growth that forms one or more lumps (nodules) in the thyroid. A goiter may be associated with no change in thyroid function or with an increase or decrease in thyroid hormones. Widespread enlargement of the thyroid can expand the gland well beyond its typical size (left) and cause a noticeable bulge in the neck (right). The most common cause of goiters worldwide is a lack of iodine in the diet. In the United States, where the use of iodized salt is common, goiters are caused by conditions that change thyroid function or factors that affect thyroid growth.Treatment depends on the cause of the goiter, symptoms, and complications resulting from the goiter. Small goiters that aren't noticeable and don't cause problems usually don't need treatment.Most people with goiters have no signs or symptoms other than a swelling at the base of the neck. In many cases, the goiter is small enough that it's only discovered during a routine medical exam or an imaging test for another condition.Other signs or symptoms depend on whether thyroid function changes, how quickly the goiter grows and whether it obstructs breathing.Signs and symptoms of hypothyroidism include:Signs and symptoms of hyperthyroidism include:Children with hyperthyroidism might also have the following:The size or position of a goiter may obstruct the airway and voice box. Signs and symptoms may include:Two hormones produced by the thyroid are thyroxine (T-4) and triiodothyronine (T-3). When the thyroid releases thyroxine (T-4) and triiodothyronine (T-3) into the bloodstream, they play a role in many functions in the body, including the regulation of:The thyroid gland also produces calcitonin, a hormone that helps regulate the amount of calcium in the blood. The pituitary gland and the hypothalamus are located within the brain and control hormone production. The pituitary gland and hypothalamus control the rate at which T-4 and T-3 are produced and released.The hypothalamus is a specialized region at the base of the brain. It acts as a thermostat for maintaining balance in multiple body systems. The hypothalamus signals the pituitary gland to make a hormone known as thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH).The pituitary gland — located below the hypothalamus — releases a certain amount of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), depending on how much T-4 and T-3 are in the blood. The thyroid gland, in turn, regulates its production of hormones based on the amount of TSH it receives from the pituitary gland.A number of factors that influence thyroid function or growth can result in a goiter. Enlargement of the thyroid can expand the gland well beyond its typical size and cause a noticeable bulge in the neck. This can be caused by single or multiple nodules (lumps) in the thyroid or by an autoimmune process. Anyone can develop a goiter. It may be present at birth or occur at any time throughout life. Some common risk factors for goiters include:A goiter itself usually doesn't cause complications. The appearance may be troublesome or embarrassing for some people. A large goiter may obstruct the airway and voice box.Changes in the production of thyroid hormones that may be associated with goiters have the potential for causing complications in multiple body systems.Nov 06, 2021CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.