Gonorrhea is a sexually transmitted infection, also called a sexually transmitted disease, caused by bacteria. Sexually transmitted diseases are infections spread mainly by contact with genitals or bodily fluids. Also called STDs, STIs or venereal disease, sexually transmitted infections are caused by bacteria, viruses or parasites.Gonorrhea bacteria can infect the urethra, rectum, female reproductive tract, mouth, throat or eyes. Gonorrhea is most commonly spread during vaginal, oral or anal sexual activity. But babies can get the infection during childbirth. In babies, gonorrhea most commonly affects the eyes.Avoiding sexual activity and not having sex prevents the spread of gonorrhea. Using a condom during sexual activity can help prevent the spread of gonorrhea. Being in a mutually monogamous relationship, in which both partners have sex only with each other and neither partner is infected, also limits the risk of an infection.The male reproductive system makes, stores and moves sperm. The testicles produce sperm. Fluid from the seminal vesicles and prostate gland combines with sperm to make semen. The penis ejaculates semen during sexual intercourse.The ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix and vagina (vaginal canal) make up the female reproductive system.In many people, gonorrhea infection causes no symptoms. If there are symptoms, they often affect the genital tract, but also may occur in other places.Male symptoms of gonorrhea infection include:Female symptoms of gonorrhea infection include:Gonorrhea also can affect these parts of the body:Make an appointment with your healthcare professional if you notice symptoms such as a burning sensation when you urinate or a pus-like discharge from your penis, vagina or rectum.Also make an appointment if your partner has been diagnosed with gonorrhea. You might not have symptoms, but if you have the infection, you can reinfect your partner even after your partner has been treated for gonorrhea.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesGonorrhea is caused by the bacterium Neisseria gonorrhoeae. The gonorrhea bacteria are most often passed from one person to another during sexual contact, including oral, anal or vaginal intercourse.Sexually active women younger than 25 and men who have sex with men are at increased risk of getting gonorrhea.Other factors that can increase your risk include:Untreated gonorrhea can lead to major complications, such as:To lower your risk of getting gonorrhea:Regular screening also is recommended for men who have sex with men. Their partners also should be tested.If you've been diagnosed with gonorrhea, do not have sex until after you and your sex partner have completed treatment and after symptoms are gone. This helps avoid getting gonorrhea again.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Rectum.Eyes.Throat.Joints.Infertility in women.Infertility in men.Infection that spreads to the joints and other areas of the body.Increased risk of HIV/AIDS.Complications in babies.Use a condom if you have sex.Limit your number of sex partners.Be sure you and your partner are tested for sexually transmitted infections.Don't have sex with someone who appears to have a sexually transmitted infection.Consider regular gonorrhea screening.Advertising & Sponsorship