Granulomatosis with polyangiitis is an uncommon disorder that causes inflammation of the blood vessels in your nose, sinuses, throat, lungs and kidneys.Formerly called Wegener's granulomatosis, this condition is one of a group of blood vessel disorders called vasculitis. It slows blood flow to some of your organs. The affected tissues can develop areas of inflammation called granulomas, which can affect how these organs work.Early diagnosis and treatment of granulomatosis with polyangiitis might lead to a full recovery. Without treatment, the condition can be fatal.Signs and symptoms of granulomatosis with polyangiitis can develop suddenly or over several months. The first warning signs usually involve your sinuses, throat or lungs. The condition often worsens rapidly, affecting blood vessels and the organs they supply, such as the kidneys.Signs and symptoms of granulomatosis with polyangiitis might include:For some people, the disease affects only the lungs. When the kidneys are affected, blood and urine tests can detect the problem. Without treatment, kidney or lung failure can occur.See your doctor if you have a runny nose that doesn't respond to over-the-counter cold medicines, especially if it's accompanied by nosebleeds and pus-like material, coughing up blood, or other warning signs of granulomatosis with polyangiitis. Because this disease can worsen quickly, early diagnosis is key to getting effective treatment.The cause of granulomatosis with polyangiitis isn't known. It's not contagious, and there's no evidence that it's inherited.The condition can lead to inflamed, narrowed blood vessels and harmful inflammatory tissue masses (granulomas). Granulomas can destroy normal tissue, and narrowed blood vessels reduce the amount of blood and oxygen that reaches your body's tissues and organs.Granulomatosis with polyangiitis can occur at any age. It most often affects people between the ages of 40 and 65.Besides affecting your nose, sinuses, throat, lungs and kidneys, granulomatosis with polyangiitis can affect your skin, eyes, ears, heart and other organs. Complications might include:Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart & Blood Health support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.346 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 58 Replies Thu, Jun 20, 2024 106 Replies Wed, Jun 19, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship