The thyroid gland sits at the base of the neck.Graves' disease is an immune system condition that affects the thyroid gland. It causes the body to make too much thyroid hormone. That condition is called hyperthyroidism.Thyroid hormones affect many organs in the body. So Graves' disease symptoms also can affect those organs. Anyone can get Graves' disease. But it's more common in women and in people older than 30.Treatment for Graves' disease helps lower the amount of thyroid hormone that the body makes and eases symptoms.An enlarged thyroid can cause a bulge in the neck.Common symptoms of Graves' disease include:Thyroid eye disease symptoms include bulging eyes and redness. The eyelids may not cover the eyeball all the way. This eye condition also is called Graves' ophthalmopathy.Thyroid eye disease also is called Graves' ophthalmopathy. About 25% of people with Graves' disease have eye symptoms. Thyroid eye disease affects muscles and other tissues around the eyes. Symptoms may include:Rarely, people who have Graves' disease have skin that darkens and thickens. The skin has a texture like an orange peel. This is called Graves' dermopathy. It comes from a buildup of protein in the skin. It often appears on the shins and on the tops of the feet.Rarely, people with Graves' disease have darkening and thickening of the skin. It most often appears on the shins or the tops of the feet. The skin has a texture like an orange peel.This is called Graves' dermopathy. It comes from a buildup of protein in the skin. It's most often mild and painless.Other medical conditions can cause symptoms like those of Graves' disease. See your healthcare professional if you have any symptoms of Graves' disease to get a prompt diagnosis.Seek medical care right away if you have heart-related symptoms, such as a fast or irregular heartbeat, or if you have vision loss.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesGraves' disease is caused by the body's disease-fighting immune system not working correctly. Experts don't know why this happens.The immune system makes antibodies that target viruses, bacteria or other foreign substances. In Graves' disease, the immune system makes an antibody to one part of the cells in the hormone-making gland in the neck, called the thyroid gland.A tiny gland at the base of the brain, called the pituitary gland, makes a hormone that controls the thyroid gland. The antibody linked with Graves' disease is called thyrotropin receptor antibody (TRAb). TRAb takes over the work of the pituitary hormone. That leads to more thyroid hormone in the body than the body needs. That condition is called hyperthyroidism.Thyroid eye disease, also called Graves' ophthalmopathy, comes from a buildup of certain carbohydrates in the muscles and tissues behind the eyes. The cause isn't known. It may involve the same antibody that can cause the thyroid gland to not work correctly.Thyroid eye disease often appears at the same time as hyperthyroidism or several months later. But symptoms of thyroid eye disease can appear years before or after hyperthyroidism starts. It's also possible to have thyroid eye disease without hyperthyroidism.Factors that can increase the risk of Graves' disease include:Complications of Graves' disease can include:Thyroid storm. This rare but deadly complication of Graves' disease also is called accelerated hyperthyroidism or thyrotoxic crisis. It's more likely to happen when severe hyperthyroidism is not treated or not treated well enough.Thyroid storm happens when a sudden and drastic rise in thyroid hormones causes a number of effects in the body. They include fever, sweating, confusion, delirium, severe weakness, tremors, irregular heartbeat, severe low blood pressure and coma. Thyroid storm needs medical attention right away.Graves' disease care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Family history.Sex.Age.Another autoimmune condition.Smoking.Pregnancy health concerns.Heart conditions.Thyroid storm.Brittle bones.Advertising & Sponsorship