The demyelinating form of Guillain-Barre syndrome destroys the protective covering of the peripheral nerves, known as the myelin sheath. This damage prevents the nerves from transmitting signals to the brain.Guillain-Barre (gee-YAH-buh-RAY) syndrome is a condition in which the body's immune system attacks the nerves. It can cause weakness, numbness or paralysis.Weakness and tingling in the hands and feet are usually the first symptoms. These sensations can quickly spread and may lead to paralysis. In its most serious form, Guillain-Barre syndrome is a medical emergency. Most people with the condition need treatment in a hospital.Guillain-Barre syndrome is rare, and the exact cause is not known. But two-thirds of people have symptoms of an infection in the six weeks before Guillain-Barre symptoms begin. Infections can include a respiratory or a gastrointestinal infection, including COVID-19. Guillain-Barre also can be caused by the Zika virus.There's no known cure for Guillain-Barre syndrome. Several treatment options can ease symptoms and help speed recovery. Most people recover completely from Guillain-Barre syndrome, but some serious illnesses can be fatal. While recovery may take up to several years, most people are able to walk again six months after symptoms first began. Some people may have lasting effects, such as weakness, numbness or fatigue.Guillain-Barre syndrome often begins with tingling and weakness starting in the feet and legs and spreading to the upper body and arms. Some people notice the first symptoms in the arms or face. As Guillain-Barre syndrome progresses, muscle weakness can turn into paralysis.Symptoms of Guillain-Barre syndrome may include:People with Guillain-Barre syndrome usually experience their most significant weakness within two weeks after symptoms begin.The symptoms of Guillain-Barre syndrome can vary based on the type. Guillain-Barre syndrome has several forms. The main types are:Call your healthcare professional if you have mild tingling in your toes or fingers that doesn't seem to be spreading or getting worse. Seek emergency medical help if you have any of these serious symptoms:Guillain-Barre syndrome is a serious condition that requires immediate hospitalization because it can worsen quickly. The sooner treatment is started, the better the chance of a complete recovery.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe exact cause of Guillain-Barre syndrome isn't known. It usually appears days or weeks after a respiratory or digestive tract infection. Rarely, recent surgery or vaccination can trigger Guillain-Barre syndrome.In Guillain-Barre syndrome, your immune system — which usually attacks only invading organisms — begins attacking the nerves. In AIDP, the nerves' protective covering, known as the myelin sheath, is damaged. The damage prevents nerves from transmitting signals to your brain, causing weakness, numbness or paralysis.Guillain-Barre syndrome may be triggered by:Guillain-Barre syndrome can affect all age groups, but the risk increases as you age. It's also slightly more common in males than females.Guillain-Barre syndrome affects your nerves. Because nerves control your movements and body functions, people with Guillain-Barre syndrome may experience:When early symptoms are worse, the risk of serious long-term complications goes up. Rarely, death may occur from complications such as respiratory distress syndrome and heart attacks.Guillain-Barre syndrome care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Acute inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy (AIDP),Miller Fisher syndrome (MFS),Acute motor axonal neuropathy (AMAN) and acute motor-sensory axonal neuropathy (AMSAN)Trouble breathing.Residual numbness or other sensations.Heart and blood pressure problems.Pain.Trouble with bowel and bladder function.Blood clots.Pressure sores.Relapse.Advertising & Sponsorship