A hammertoe is curled due to a bend in the middle joint of the toe.Hammertoe and mallet toe are foot problems that cause a bend in a toe or toes. Wearing shoes that don't fit well can cause hammertoe and mallet toe. Other causes are foot injury and certain illnesses, such as diabetes. Often the cause isn't known.A hammertoe has an unusual bend in the middle joint of a toe. Mallet toe has a bend in the joint nearest the toenail. Hammertoe and mallet toe usually occur in the second, third and fourth toes.Changing footwear, wearing shoe inserts, and using other devices might relieve the pain and pressure of hammertoe and mallet toe. Surgery can correct the condition and relieve the pressure if these treatments don't work.Hammertoe and mallet toe have an unusual bend in the joints of one or more of the toes. Other symptoms include:See a health care provider if you have lasting foot pain that affects your ability to walk.Hammertoe and mallet toe have been linked to:Factors that can increase the risk of hammertoe and mallet toe include:For a while, the toe still might be able to unbend. But over time, the tendons and joints of a hammertoe or mallet toe might tighten. This can cause the toe to stay bent.Shoes can rub against the higher part of the bent toe. The bent position also may lead to excess pressure on the bone of the toe tip instead of the fat pad on the toe. This can cause painful corns or calluses.Shoes that fit well can prevent many foot, heel and ankle problems. Here's what to look for when buying shoes:These added tips can help buying the right shoes:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Certain shoes.Trauma.Imbalance of the toe muscles.Sex.Certain diseases.Enough toe room.Low heels.Shoes that adjust.Shop at the end of the day.Check size.Buy shoes that fit right away.Advertising & Sponsorship