A hamstring injury involves straining or pulling one of the hamstring muscles — the group of three muscles that run along the back of the thigh.Hamstring injuries often occur in people who play sports that involves sprinting with sudden stops and starts. Examples include soccer, basketball, football and tennis. Hamstring injuries can occur in runners and in dancers as well.Self-care measures such as rest, ice and pain medicine are often all that's needed to relieve the pain and swelling of a hamstring injury. Rarely, surgery is done to repair a hamstring muscle or tendon.A hamstring injury typically causes a sudden, sharp pain in the back of the thigh. There might also be a "popping" or tearing sensation.Swelling and tenderness usually develop within a few hours. There might be bruising or a change in skin color along the back of the leg. Some people have muscle weakness or are not able to put weight on the injured leg.Mild hamstring strains can be treated at home. But see a health care provider if you can't bear weight on the injured leg or if you can't walk more than four steps without a lot of pain.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe hamstring muscles are a group of three muscles that run along the back of the thigh from the hip to just below the knee. These muscles make it possible to extend the leg back and to bend the knee. Stretching or overloading any one of these muscles beyond its limit can cause injury.Hamstring injury risk factors include:Returning to tiring activities before hamstring muscles are completely healed might cause the injury to happen again.Being in good physical condition and doing regular stretching and strengthening exercises can help lessen the risk of a hamstring injury. Try to be in shape to play your sport. Don't play your sport to get in shape.If you have a job that's physically demanding, staying in shape can help prevent injuries. Ask your health care provider about good exercises to do regularly.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Sports.Earlier hamstring injury.Tired muscles, weak muscles and muscles that don't stretch well.Muscle imbalance.Age.Advertising & Sponsorship