A hangover is a group of unpleasant symptoms that can happen after drinking too much alcohol. As if feeling awful weren't bad enough, frequent hangovers also are linked with poor performance and conflict at home, school and work.Generally, the more alcohol you drink, the more likely you are to have a hangover the next day. But there's no easy way to know how much you can safely drink and still avoid a hangover.However unpleasant, most hangovers go away on their own, though they can last up to 24 hours. If you choose to drink alcohol, doing so responsibly can help you stay away from hangovers.Hangover symptoms often begin when your blood alcohol content drops and is at or near zero. Symptoms are usually in full effect the morning after a night of heavy drinking. Depending on what and how much alcohol you drank, you may notice:Hangovers after a single night's drinking go away on their own. Talk with your healthcare professional if you're concerned that frequent heavy drinking may lead to serious problems, such as alcohol withdrawal.More-serious symptoms from heavy drinking may be a sign of alcohol poisoning — a life-threatening emergency. Alcohol poisoning is a serious and sometimes deadly result of drinking large amounts of alcohol in a short period of time. Drinking too much too quickly can affect breathing, heart rate, body temperature and gag reflex. In some cases, this can lead to coma and death.Call 911 or your local emergency number if a person who has been drinking shows symptoms of:A person who can't be awakened is at risk of dying. If you suspect that someone has alcohol poisoning — even if you don't see the classic symptoms — get medical help right away.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesHangovers are caused by drinking too much alcohol. A single alcoholic drink is enough to trigger a hangover for some people, while others may drink heavily and not have a hangover.Several issues may contribute to a hangover. For example:Alcoholic beverages contain ingredients called congeners. These give many types of alcoholic beverages their taste and smell. They also can play a role in hangovers. Congeners are found in larger amounts in dark liquors, such as brandy and bourbon, than in clear liquors, such as vodka and gin.Congeners are more likely to produce a hangover or make a hangover worse. But drinking too much alcohol of any color can still make you feel bad the next morning.Anyone who drinks alcohol can have a hangover. But some people are more likely to have hangovers than others are. A difference in a gene that affects the way the body breaks down alcohol may make some people flush, sweat or become ill after drinking even a small amount of alcohol.Issues that may make a hangover more likely or worse include:Some people have a headache a few hours after drinking wine — especially red wine. The cause of the headache isn't clear. But it's different from a hangover, which may or may not include a headache. It's possible that some chemicals in wine and how the body responds to them could result in a headache after drinking wine. More research is needed to find the exact cause of wine headache.When you have a hangover, you're likely to have problems with:Not surprisingly, this short-term dulling of your abilities increases your risk of problems at home, school and work, such as:Some companies use misleading advertising to claim that their products can prevent hangovers. But the only guaranteed way to prevent a hangover is to not drink alcohol.If you choose to drink alcohol, do so in moderation. Moderate alcohol use for healthy adults means:The less alcohol you drink, the less likely you are to have a hangover. It may help to:Some people take pain relievers to prevent hangover symptoms. But ask your healthcare professional if this is safe for you and how much medicine is best for you. These medicines may not work well together with other medicines you take.Aspirin and ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) can cause your stomach to make more acid, which can irritate your stomach. And acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) may cause serious liver damage if taken with too much alcohol.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Alcohol causes the body to make more urine.Alcohol triggers an inflammatory response from the immune system.Alcohol irritates the lining of the stomach.Alcohol can cause blood sugar levels to fall.Alcohol prevents restful sleep.Drinking on an empty stomach.Using other drugs, such as nicotine, along with alcohol.Not sleeping well or long enough after drinking.Having a family history of alcohol use disorder.Drinking darker colored alcoholic beverages.Eat before and while drinking.Choose carefully.Drink water between alcoholic drinks.Know your limits and only drink in moderation.Take it slow.Advertising & Sponsorship