Head lice are tiny insects that feed on blood from the human scalp. Head lice most often affect children. The insects usually spread through direct transfer from the hair of one person to the hair of another. Head lice feed on blood from the scalp. The female louse lays eggs (nits) that stick to hair shafts. Having head lice isn't a sign of poor personal hygiene or an unclean living environment. Head lice don't carry bacterial or viral diseases.Nonprescription and prescription medications can help treat head lice. Follow treatment instructions carefully to rid the scalp and hair of lice and their eggs.People also use a number of home or natural remedies to get rid of head lice. But there is little to no clinical evidence that they're effective.Common signs and symptoms of head lice may include:See a health care provider before you begin treatment if you suspect that you or your child has head lice. Your or your child's health care provider can confirm that head lice are present. Studies show that many children have been treated for head lice with nonprescription medications or home remedies when they didn't have lice.Things often mistaken for nits include:A head louse is a tan or grayish insect about the size of a strawberry seed. It feeds on human blood from the scalp. The female louse produces a sticky substance that firmly attaches each egg to the base of a hair shaft less than 1/4 inch (5 millimeters) from the scalp.A louse goes through three stages:Head lice crawl, but they can't jump or fly. Head lice often spread from one person to another by direct head-to-head contact, often within a family or among children who have close contact at school or play.It's less common for head lice to spread without direct contact. But the insects may spread from one person to another through personal items, such as:Head lice may also spread when items of clothing are stored together. For example, hats or scarves hung on the same hook or stored in the same school locker could serve as vehicles for spreading lice.Household pets, such as dogs and cats, don't play a role in spreading head lice.Head lice are spread primarily by direct head-to-head contact. So the risk of spreading head lice is greatest among children who play or go to school together. In the United States, cases of head lice most often occur in children in preschool through elementary school.If your child scratches an itchy scalp due to head lice, it's possible for the skin to break and develop an infection.It's difficult to prevent the spread of head lice among children in child care facilities and schools because there is so much close contact.The chance of indirect spread from personal items is slight. However, to help prevent head lice from spreading, you may tell your child to:It's not necessary to avoid sharing protective headgear for sports and bicycling when sharing is required.Apr 30, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.