Head and neck cancers are cancers that start in the head and neck area. There are many kinds of cancer that can happen in the head and neck. Each kind begins as a growth of cells that can invade and destroy healthy body tissue.Head and neck cancer often refers to cancers that start in the mouth, throat, sinuses and salivary glands. But other cancers can happen in the head and neck and are sometimes considered part of this category too.Head and neck cancer isn't a diagnosis. Instead, it's a category of cancers that have some things in common. For example, many head and neck cancers share some risk factors and treatments. Most head and neck cancers begin in squamous cells. These thin, flat cells make up the outer layer of the skin. They also line the inside of the nose, mouth and throat. Cancers that begin in the squamous cells are called squamous cell carcinomas. Cancers can begin in other kinds of cells in the head and neck area, though these are less common.Which treatment you'll have for your head and neck cancer depends on many factors. These might include the location of the cancer, its size and the type of cells involved. Your healthcare team also considers your overall health. Treatment options might include surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy and others.Head and neck cancer symptoms may include a sore in the mouth and pain when swallowing. Symptoms might depend on where the cancer starts. Head and neck cancers include cancers that start in the mouth, throat, sinuses and salivary glands.Symptoms in the mouth and throat:Symptoms in the nose:Other symptoms:Make an appointment with a doctor or other healthcare professional if you have any symptoms that worry you.Experts aren't certain exactly what causes head and neck cancers. What causes a cancer may depend on where the cancer starts. Head and neck cancers include cancers that start in the mouth, throat, sinuses and salivary glands.In general, head and neck cancer starts when a cell in the head and neck area develops changes in its DNA. A cell's DNA holds the instructions that tell a cell what to do. In healthy cells, the DNA gives instructions to grow and multiply at a set rate. The instructions tell the cells to die at a set time. In cancer cells, the changes give different instructions. The changes tell the cancer cells to make many more cells quickly. Cancer cells can keep living when healthy cells would die. This causes too many cells.The cancer cells might form a mass called a tumor. The tumor can grow to invade and destroy healthy body tissue. In time, cancer cells can break away and spread to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads, it's called metastatic cancer.Head and neck cancers have some risk factors in common. These include using tobacco and drinking alcohol. Other risk factors depend on the location of the cancer. Head and neck cancers include cancers that start in the mouth, throat, sinuses and salivary glands.In general, things that increase the risk of head and neck cancers include:To help prevent head and neck cancers, don't smoke and limit the amount of alcohol you drink. Other steps you can take may depend on the specific type of cancer. Head and neck cancers include cancers that start in the mouth, throat, sinuses and salivary glands.To lower the risk of head and neck cancer:If you don't smoke or use other kinds of tobacco, don't start. If you do use tobacco, make a plan to quit. Talk with a healthcare professional about things that can help you quit.If you choose to drink alcohol, do so in moderation. For healthy adults, that means up to one drink a day for women and up to two drinks a day for men.Receiving a vaccination to prevent HPV infection may reduce the risk of HPV-related cancers. Ask a healthcare professional whether the HPV vaccine is right for you.Wear a hat with a wide brim to shade your head and neck. Use a broad-spectrum sunscreen with an SPF of at least 30, even on cloudy days. Apply sunscreen generously. Reapply every two hours, or more often if you're swimming or sweating.Head and neck cancers care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Head & Neck Cancer support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.37 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 9 Replies Fri, Jun 07, 2024 69 Replies Fri, Jun 07, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Using tobacco.Drinking alcohol.Being exposed to human papillomavirus, also called HPV.Breathing chemicals in the air.Being exposed to the sun or tanning lamps.Advertising & Sponsorship