Headaches in children are common and usually aren't serious. Like adults, children can develop different types of headaches, including migraines or stress-related (tension) headaches. Children can also have chronic daily headaches.In some cases, headaches in children are caused by an infection, high levels of stress or anxiety, or minor head trauma. It's important to pay attention to your child's headache symptoms and consult a doctor if the headache worsens or occurs frequently.Headaches in children usually can be treated with over-the-counter (OTC) pain medications and healthy habits such as a regular schedule for sleeping and eating.Children get the same types of headaches adults do, but their symptoms may be a little different. For example, migraine pain in adults often lasts at least four hours — but in children, the pain may not last as long.Differences in symptoms may make it difficult to pinpoint headache type in a child, especially in a younger child who can't describe symptoms. In general, though, certain symptoms tend to fall more frequently into certain categories.Migraines can cause:Even infants can have migraines. A child who's too young to tell you what's wrong may cry or rock back and forth to indicate severe pain.Tension-type headaches can cause:Younger children may withdraw from regular play and want to sleep more. Tension-type headaches can last from 30 minutes to several days.Cluster headaches are uncommon in children under 10 years of age. They usually:Doctors use the phrase "chronic daily headache" (CDH) for migraines and tension-type headaches that occur more than 15 days a month. chronic daily headache (CDH) may be caused by an infection, minor head injury or taking pain medications — even nonprescription pain medications — too often.Most headaches aren't serious, but seek prompt medical care if your child's headaches:Talk to your child's doctor if you're worried or have questions about your child's headaches.A number of factors can cause your child to develop headaches. Factors include:Any child can develop headaches, but they're more common in:The following may help you prevent headaches or reduce the severity of headaches in children:Keep a headache diary. A diary can help you determine what causes your child's headaches. Note when the headaches start, how long they last and what, if anything, provides relief.Record your child's response to taking any headache medication. Over time, the items you note in the headache diary should help you understand your child's symptoms so that you can take specific preventive measures.Aug 06, 2021CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.