Heart failure occurs when the heart muscle doesn't pump blood as well as it should. When this happens, blood often backs up and fluid can build up in the lungs, causing shortness of breath.Certain heart conditions gradually leave the heart too weak or stiff to fill and pump blood properly. These conditions include narrowed arteries in the heart and high blood pressure.Proper treatment may improve the symptoms of heart failure and may help some people live longer. Lifestyle changes can improve quality of life. Try to lose weight, exercise, use less salt and manage stress.But heart failure can be life-threatening. People with heart failure may have severe symptoms. Some may need a heart transplant or a device to help the heart pump blood.Heart failure is sometimes called congestive heart failure.Heart failure occurs when the heart muscle doesn't pump blood as well as it should. Blood often backs up and causes fluid to build up in the lungs and in the legs. The fluid buildup can cause shortness of breath and swelling of the legs and feet. Poor blood flow may cause the skin to appear blue or gray. Depending on your skin color, these color changes may be harder or easier to see. Some types of heart failure can lead to an enlarged heart.If you have heart failure, your heart can't supply enough blood to meet your body's needs.Symptoms may develop slowly. Sometimes, heart failure symptoms start suddenly. Heart failure symptoms may include:See your health care provider if you think you might have symptoms of heart failure. Call 911 or emergency medical help if you have any of the following:These symptoms may be due to heart failure. But there are many other possible causes. Don't try to diagnose yourself.At the emergency room, health care providers do tests to learn if your symptoms are due to heart failure or something else.Call your health care provider right away if you have heart failure and:Such changes could mean that existing heart failure is getting worse or that treatment isn't working.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free, and receive heart transplant and heart failure content, plus expertise on heart health.ErrorSelect a locationErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You will receive the first heart failure and transplantation email in your inbox shortly. When seeking answers, people often look to experts for clear and accurate information. By subscribing to heart failure content from Mayo Clinic, you have taken an important first step in gaining knowledge and using it for your overall health and well-being.If you don't receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com. Please, try again in a couple of minutesA typical heart has two upper and two lower chambers. The upper chambers, the right and left atria, receive incoming blood. The lower chambers, the more muscular right and left ventricles, pump blood out of the heart. The heart valves help keep blood flowing in the right direction.If the heart weakens, as it can with heart failure, it begins to enlarge. This forces the heart to work harder to pump blood to the rest of the body.Heart failure can be caused by a weakened, damaged or stiff heart.The heart muscle can be damaged by certain infections, heavy alcohol use, illegal drug use and some chemotherapy medicines. Your genes also can play a role.Any of the following conditions also can damage or weaken the heart and cause heart failure.Coronary artery disease and heart attack. Coronary artery disease is the most common cause of heart failure. The disease results from the buildup of fatty deposits in the arteries. The deposits narrow the arteries. This reduces blood flow and can lead to heart attack.A heart attack occurs suddenly when an artery feeding the heart becomes completely blocked. Damage to the heart muscle from a heart attack may mean that the heart can no longer pump as well as it should.Causes of sudden heart failure also include:Heart failure usually begins with the lower left heart chamber, called the left ventricle. This is the heart's main pumping chamber. But heart failure also can affect the right side. The lower right heart chamber is called the right ventricle. Sometimes heart failure affects both sides of the heart.Diseases and conditions that increase the risk of heart failure include:Medicines that may increase the risk of heart failure include: Other risk factors for heart failure include:If you have health failure, it's important to have regular health checkups, even if symptoms improve. Your health care provider can examine you and run tests to check for complications.Complications of heart failure depend on your age, overall health and the severity of heart disease. They may include:One way to prevent heart failure is to treat and control the conditions that can cause it. These conditions include coronary artery disease, high blood pressure, diabetes and obesity.Some of the same lifestyle changes used to manage heart failure also may help prevent it. Try these heart-healthy tips:Heart failure care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Coronary artery disease and heart attack.High blood pressure.Heart valve disease.Inflammation of the heart muscle, also called myocarditis.A heart problem that you're born with, also called a congenital heart defect.Irregular heart rhythms, called arrhythmias.Other diseases.Coronary artery disease.Heart attack.Heart valve disease.High blood pressure.Irregular heartbeats.Congenital heart disease.Diabetes.Sleep apnea.Obesity.Viral infections.Some diabetes medicines.Some other medicines.Aging.Alcohol use.Smoking or using tobacco.Kidney damage or failure.Other heart problems.Liver damage.Sudden cardiac death.Advertising & Sponsorship