In a typical heart rhythm, a tiny cluster of cells at the sinus node sends out an electrical signal. The signal then travels through the atria to the atrioventricular (AV) node and then passes into the ventricles, causing them to contract and pump out blood.A heart arrhythmia (uh-RITH-me-uh) is an irregular heartbeat. A heart arrhythmia occurs when the electrical signals that tell the heart to beat don't work properly. The heart may beat too fast or too slow. Or the pattern of the heartbeat may be inconsistent.A heart arrhythmia may feel like a fluttering, pounding or racing heartbeat. Some heart arrhythmias are harmless. Others may cause life-threatening symptoms.There are times when it is OK to have a fast or slow heartbeat. For example, the heart may beat faster with exercise or slow down during sleep.Heart arrhythmia treatment may include medicines, devices such as pacemakers, or a procedure or surgery. The goals of treatment are to control or get rid of fast, slow or otherwise irregular heartbeats. A heart-healthy lifestyle can help prevent heart damage that can trigger some heart arrhythmias.In general, heart arrhythmias are grouped by the speed of the heart rate. For example:Types of tachycardias include:A heart rate below 60 beats a minute is considered bradycardia. But a low resting heart rate doesn't always mean there's a problem. If you're physically fit, your heart may be able to pump enough blood to the body with less than 60 beats a minute.If you have a slow heart rate and your heart isn't pumping enough blood, you may have a type of bradycardia. Types of bradycardias include:Premature heartbeats are extra beats that occur one at a time, sometimes in patterns that alternate with a regular heartbeat. If the extra beats come from the top chamber of the heart, they are called premature atrial contractions (PACs). If they come from the bottom chamber, they are called premature ventricular contractions (PVCs).A premature heartbeat may feel like your heart skipped a beat. These extra beats are generally not a concern. They rarely mean you have a more serious condition. Still, a premature beat can trigger a longer lasting arrhythmia, especially in people with heart disease. Occasionally, having very frequent premature ventricular beats may lead to a weak heart.Premature heartbeats may occur when resting. Stress, heavy exercise and the use of stimulants, such as caffeine or nicotine, also may cause premature heartbeats.A heart arrhythmia may not cause any symptoms. The irregular heartbeat may be noticed during a health checkup for another reason.Symptoms of an arrhythmia may include:Other symptoms may include:If you feel like your heart is beating too fast or too slow, or it's skipping a beat, make an appointment for a health checkup. You may be told to see a doctor trained in heart diseases, called a cardiologist.Get emergency medical care if you have these heart symptoms:Always call 911 or your local emergency number if you think you might be having a heart attack.A type of arrhythmia called ventricular fibrillation can cause a dramatic drop in blood pressure. This can cause the person to fall to the ground within seconds, also called collapse. Soon the person's breathing and pulse will stop. Ventricular fibrillation is an emergency that needs immediate medical help. It's the most frequent cause of sudden cardiac death.If this happens, follow these steps:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesTo understand the cause of heart arrhythmias, it may help to know how the heart works.The typical heart has four chambers.The heart's electrical system controls the heartbeat. The heart's electrical signals start in a group of cells at the top of the heart called the sinus node. They pass through a pathway between the upper and lower heart chambers called the atrioventricular (AV) node. The movement of the signals causes the heart to squeeze and pump blood.In a healthy heart, this heart signaling process usually goes smoothly, resulting in a resting heart rate of 60 to 100 beats a minute.But some things can change how electrical signals travel through the heart and cause arrhythmias. They include:Things that may increase the risk of heart arrhythmias include:Complications depend on the type of heart arrhythmia. Possible complications of heart arrhythmias include:Blood-thinning medicines can lower the risk of stroke related to atrial fibrillation and other heart arrhythmias. If you have a heart arrhythmia, ask a healthcare professional if you need to take a blood thinner.If an arrhythmia is causing heart failure symptoms, treatment to control the heart rate may help the heart work better.Lifestyle changes used to manage heart disease may help prevent heart arrhythmias. Try these heart-healthy tips:Heart arrhythmia care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart Rhythm Conditions support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.414 Replies Tue, May 28, 2024 93 Replies Thu, May 23, 2024 28 Replies Sat, May 04, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Atrial fibrillation (AFib).Atrial flutter.Supraventricular tachycardia.Ventricular fibrillation.Ventricular tachycardia.Sick sinus syndrome.Conduction block.Coronary artery disease, other heart problems and previous heart surgery.High blood pressure.Heart problems present at birth.Thyroid disease.Obstructive sleep apnea.Electrolyte imbalance.Some medicines and supplements.Excessive alcohol use.Caffeine, nicotine or illegal drug use.Advertising & Sponsorship