Heart murmurs are sounds — such as whooshing or swishing — made by rapid, choppy (turbulent) blood flow through the heart. The sounds can be heard with a device called a stethoscope. A typical heartbeat makes two sounds like "lubb-dupp" (sometimes described as "lub-DUP") when the heart valves are closing.Heart murmurs can be present at birth (congenital) or develop later in life (acquired).Some heart murmurs are harmless (innocent). An innocent heart murmur is not a sign of heart disease and doesn't need treatment. Other heart murmurs may be a sign of a serious heart condition. Tests are needed to check the heart and heart valves. Heart murmur treatment depends on the cause.Harmless (innocent) heart murmurs usually don't cause any other symptoms.Symptoms of worrisome heart murmurs depend on the cause. Heart murmur symptoms may include:Most heart murmurs aren't serious. If you're concerned about a heart murmur, make an appointment to see your primary care provider. Your provider can tell you if follow-up care is needed.A heart murmur is caused by rapid, choppy (turbulent) blood flow through the heart. A heart murmur may happen:A person with an innocent murmur usually has a typical heart. Innocent heart murmurs are common in newborns and children.Things that might change blood flow and cause an innocent heart murmur include:Innocent heart murmurs may go away over time. Sometimes, heart murmurs continue for life without causing serious health problems.In children, worrisome murmurs are usually due to a problem with the heart's structure that's present at birth (congenital heart defect).Congenital causes of worrisome heart murmurs include:In adults, worrisome heart murmurs are usually due to heart valve problems that develop later in life (acquired heart valve disease). Things that can damage the heart valves include:Things that increase the risk of heart murmurs in babies includes:Some medical conditions can increase the risk of heart murmurs, including:There's no known prevention for heart murmurs. But healthy lifestyle changes can improve heart health and prevent some conditions linked to murmurs in adults. Many childhood heart murmurs go away on their own as children grow.May 27, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.