Heatstroke is a condition caused by your body overheating, usually as a result of prolonged exposure to or physical exertion in high temperatures. This most serious form of heat injury, heatstroke, can occur if your body temperature rises to 104 F (40 C) or higher. The condition is most common in the summer months.Heatstroke requires emergency treatment. Untreated heatstroke can quickly damage your brain, heart, kidneys and muscles. The damage worsens the longer treatment is delayed, increasing your risk of serious complications or death.Heatstroke signs and symptoms include:If you think a person may be experiencing heatstroke, seek immediate medical help. Call 911 or your local emergency services number.Take immediate action to cool the overheated person while waiting for emergency treatment.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesHeatstroke can occur as a result of:In either type of heatstroke, your condition can be brought on by:Anyone can develop heatstroke, but several factors increase your risk:Sudden exposure to hot weather. You may be more susceptible to heat-related illness if you're exposed to a sudden increase in temperature, such as during an early-summer heat wave or travel to a hotter climate.Limit activity for at least several days to allow yourself to acclimate to the change. However, you may still have an increased risk of heatstroke until you've experienced several weeks of higher temperatures.Certain medications. Some medications affect your body's ability to stay hydrated and respond to heat. Be especially careful in hot weather if you take medications that narrow your blood vessels (vasoconstrictors), regulate your blood pressure by blocking adrenaline (beta blockers), rid your body of sodium and water (diuretics), or reduce psychiatric symptoms (antidepressants or antipsychotics).Stimulants for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and illegal stimulants such as amphetamines and cocaine also make you more vulnerable to heatstroke.Heatstroke can result in a number of complications, depending on how long the body temperature is high. Severe complications include:Heatstroke is predictable and preventable. Take these steps to prevent heatstroke during hot weather:Never leave anyone in a parked car. This is a common cause of heat-related deaths in children. When parked in the sun, the temperature in your car can rise 20 degrees F (more than 11 C) in 10 minutes.It's not safe to leave a person in a parked car in warm or hot weather, even if the windows are cracked or the car is in shade. When your car is parked, keep it locked to prevent a child from getting inside.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.High body temperature.Altered mental state or behavior.Alteration in sweating.Nausea and vomiting.Flushed skin.Rapid breathing.Racing heart rate.Headache.Exposure to a hot environment.Strenuous activity.Wearing excess clothingDrinking alcohol,Becoming dehydratedAge.Exertion in hot weather.Sudden exposure to hot weather.A lack of air conditioning.Certain medications.Certain health conditions.Vital organ damage.Death.Wear loosefitting, lightweight clothing.Protect against sunburn.Drink plenty of fluids.Take extra precautions with certain medications.Never leave anyone in a parked car.Take it easy during the hottest parts of the day.Get acclimated.Be cautious if you're at increased risk.Advertising & Sponsorship