Heat exhaustion is a condition that happens when your body overheats. Symptoms may include heavy sweating and a rapid pulse. Heat exhaustion is one of three heat-related illnesses, with heat cramps being the mildest and heatstroke being the most serious.Causes of heat illness include exposure to high temperatures, particularly when there is also high humidity, and strenuous physical activity. Without prompt treatment, heat exhaustion can lead to heatstroke, a life-threatening condition. Fortunately, heat exhaustion is preventable.Symptoms of heat exhaustion may start suddenly or progress over time, especially with prolonged periods of exercise. Possible heat exhaustion symptoms include:If you think you have heat exhaustion:Contact your doctor if your symptoms get worse or they don't improve within one hour.If you're with someone who has heat exhaustion, seek immediate medical help if they become confused or distressed, lose consciousness, or are unable to drink. If their core body temperature — measured by a rectal thermometer — reaches 104 F (40 C) or higher, they need immediate cooling and urgent medical attention.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe body's heat combined with environmental heat results in what's called your core temperature. This is your body's inner temperature. Your body needs to regulate heat gain in hot weather or heat loss in cold weather to keep a core temperature that's typical for you. The average core temperature is about 98.6 F (37 C).In hot weather, your body cools itself mainly by sweating. The evaporation of your sweat regulates your body temperature. But when you exercise strenuously or otherwise overexert in hot, humid weather, your body is less able to cool itself efficiently.As a result, heat cramps may start in your body. Heat cramps are the mildest form of heat-related illness. Symptoms of heat cramps often include heavy sweating, fatigue, thirst and muscle cramps. Prompt treatment may prevent heat cramps from progressing to more-serious heat illnesses such as heat exhaustion. Drinking fluids or sports drinks that have electrolytes (Gatorade, Powerade, others) can help treat heat cramps. Other treatments for heat cramps include getting into cooler temperatures, such as an air-conditioned or shaded place, and resting.Besides hot weather and strenuous activity, other causes of heat exhaustion include:Anyone can get heat illness, but certain factors increase your sensitivity to heat. They include:If heat exhaustion isn't treated, it can lead to heatstroke. Heatstroke is a life-threatening condition. It happens when your core body temperature reaches 104 F (40 C) or higher. Heatstroke needs immediate medical attention to prevent permanent damage to your brain and other vital organs that can result in death.There are a lot of things you can do to prevent heat exhaustion and other heat-related illnesses. When temperatures climb, remember to:Never leave anyone in a parked car. This is a common cause of heat-related deaths in children. When parked in the sun, the temperature in your car can rise 20 degrees Fahrenheit (more than 11 C) in 10 minutes.It's not safe to leave someone in a parked car in warm or hot weather, even if the windows are cracked or the car is in shade. Keep parked cars locked to prevent a child from getting inside.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Dehydration,Alcohol use,Overdressing,Young age or old age.Certain drugs.Obesity.Sudden temperature changes.A high heat index.Wear loose fitting, lightweight clothing.Protect against sunburn.Drink plenty of fluids.Be careful with certain medicines.Never leave anyone in a parked car.Take it easy during the hottest parts of the day.Get acclimated.Be cautious if you're at increased risk.Advertising & Sponsorship