Some women have menstrual bleeding that is heavy or lasts for more than a few days. This condition used to be called menorrhagia. Heavy menstrual bleeding is a common concern. But most women don't have enough blood loss for it to be called heavy menstrual bleeding.Some women have menstrual bleeding between periods, or earlier or later in their cycles than expected. This type of bleeding is called abnormal uterine bleeding or irregular menstrual bleeding.With heavy menstrual bleeding, blood flow and cramping make it harder to do your usual activities. If you dread your period because you have heavy menstrual bleeding, talk with your doctor. There are many treatments that can help.Symptoms of heavy menstrual bleeding may include:Seek medical help before your next scheduled exam if you have:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Get the latest information from our Mayo Clinic experts on women’s health topics, serious and complex conditions, wellness and more. Click to view a preview and subscribe below.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThere are three major types of uterine fibroids. Intramural fibroids grow within the muscular uterine wall. Submucosal fibroids bulge into the uterine cavity. Subserosal fibroids project to the outside of the uterus. Some submucosal or subserosal fibroids may be pedunculated. This means they hang from a stalk inside or outside the uterus.Uterine polyps attach to the uterus by a large base or a thin stalk. They can grow to be several centimeters in size. Uterine polyps can cause irregular menstrual bleeding, bleeding after menopause, very heavy menstrual flow or bleeding between periods.With adenomyosis, the same type of tissue that lines the uterus is present within the muscles that make up the walls of the uterus. It also can grow from the surface of the uterus into the walls of the uterus. This tissue also is known as endometrial tissue.In some cases, the reason for heavy menstrual bleeding is unknown. But a number of conditions may cause heavy menstrual bleeding. They include:Hormones being out of balance. In a typical menstrual cycle, there's a balance between the hormones estrogen and progesterone. This controls the buildup of the lining of the uterus. The lining of the uterus also is known as the endometrium. This lining is shed during a menstrual period. When hormones are out of balance, the lining becomes too thick and sheds by way of heavy menstrual bleeding or unexpected bleeding between periods.A number of conditions can cause hormone imbalances. These include obesity, insulin resistance, thyroid problems and polycystic ovary syndrome, which also is called PCOS.Risk factors vary with age and the medical conditions you have. Usually, the release of an egg from the ovaries signals the body to make progesterone. Progesterone is the hormone most responsible for keeping periods regular. If no egg is released, the body does not make enough progesterone. This can result in heavy menstrual bleeding or unexpected bleeding between periods.In teenagers, an irregular period or heavy menstrual bleeding often happens when an egg is not released during a monthly cycle. Teenagers are most likely to have cycles without an egg release during the first year after they have their first period.In older women of reproductive age, heavy menstrual bleeding is often caused by problems with the uterus. These include fibroids, polyps and adenomyosis. But other problems also could cause heavy menstrual bleeding. Examples include cancer of the uterus, bleeding disorders, side effects of medicines, and liver or kidney disease.Menstrual bleeding that is too heavy or lasts too long can lead to other medical conditions. These include:Anemia. Heavy menstrual bleeding can cause anemia related to blood loss. Anemia is a condition in which the body lacks enough red blood cells to carry oxygen to tissues. The number of red blood cells is measured by hemoglobin. Hemoglobin is a protein in red blood cells that carries oxygen to tissues throughout the body.Iron deficiency anemia occurs as the body tries to make up for lost red blood cells. The body uses iron stores to make more hemoglobin so that enough oxygen can be carried to tissues. Heavy menstrual bleeding may make iron levels too low. This may result in iron deficiency anemia.Symptoms include headaches and feeling tired. Although diet plays a role in iron deficiency anemia, the problem is made worse by heavy menstrual periods.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Hormones being out of balance.Problems with the ovaries.Uterine fibroids.Polyps.Adenomyosis.Intrauterine device, also called an IUD.Pregnancy complications.Cancer.Genetic bleeding disorders.Medicines.Other medical conditions.Anemia.Severe pain.Advertising & Sponsorship