Hemorrhoids are swollen veins in your lower rectum. Hemorrhoids inside the rectum are usually painless but tend to bleed. Hemorrhoids outside the rectum may cause pain.Hemorrhoids (HEM-uh-roids), also called piles, are swollen veins in the anus and lower rectum. Hemorrhoids are similar to varicose veins. Hemorrhoids can develop inside the rectum, called internal hemorrhoids. They also can develop under the skin around the anus, called external hemorrhoids.There are several options available to treat hemorrhoids. Many people get relief with home treatments and lifestyle changes.Symptoms of hemorrhoids usually depend on the type of hemorrhoid.Internal hemorrhoids lie inside the rectum. You usually can't see or feel them, and they rarely cause discomfort. But straining or irritation when passing stool can cause:These are under the skin around the anus. Symptoms might include:Blood can pool in an external hemorrhoid and form a clot, called a thrombus. A thrombosed hemorrhoid can result in:If you have bleeding during bowel movements or you have hemorrhoids that don't improve after a week of home care, talk to your health care provider.Don't assume rectal bleeding is due to hemorrhoids, especially if you have changes in bowel habits or if your stools change in color or consistency. Rectal bleeding can happen with other diseases, including colorectal cancer and anal cancer.Seek emergency care if you have large amounts of rectal bleeding, lightheadedness, dizziness or faintness.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care.If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe veins around the anus tend to stretch under pressure and may bulge or swell. Hemorrhoids can develop from increased pressure in the lower rectum due to:As people age, the risk of hemorrhoids increases. That's because the tissues that support the veins in the rectum and anus can weaken and stretch. This also can happen during pregnancy because the baby's weight puts pressure on the anal region.Complications of hemorrhoids are rare but may include:The best way to prevent hemorrhoids is to keep your stools soft so they pass easily. To prevent hemorrhoids and reduce symptoms of hemorrhoids, follow these tips:Consider fiber supplements. Most people don't get enough fiber in their diets. Studies have shown that nonprescription fiber supplements, such as psyllium (Metamucil, Konsyl, others) or methylcellulose (Citrucel), can lessen symptoms and bleeding from hemorrhoids.If you use fiber supplements, be sure to drink at least eight glasses of water or other fluids every day. Otherwise, the supplements can cause constipation or make it worse.Hemorrhoids care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Anemia.Strangulated hemorrhoid.Blood clot.Eat high-fiber foods.Drink plenty of fluids.Consider fiber supplements.Don't strain.Exercise.Avoid long periods of sitting.Advertising & Sponsorship