Henoch-Schonlein purpura (also known as IgA vasculitis) is a disorder that causes the small blood vessels in your skin, joints, intestines and kidneys to become inflamed and bleed. Henoch-Schonlein purpura is an inflammation of the small blood vessels of the skin, joints, bowels and kidneys. When blood vessels get inflamed, they can bleed into the skin, causing a reddish-purple rash (purpura). The most striking feature of this form of vasculitis is a purplish rash, typically on the lower legs and buttocks. Henoch-Schonlein purpura can also cause abdominal pain and aching joints. Rarely, serious kidney damage can occur.Henoch-Schonlein purpura can affect anyone, but it's most common in children under 10. The condition usually improves on its own. Medical care is generally needed if the disorder affects the kidneys.The four main characteristics of Henoch-Schonlein purpura include:See your doctor if you have Henoch-Schonlein purpura and it's causing serious problems with your digestive tract.If your child develops the rash associated with this condition, see your doctor as soon as possible.In Henoch-Schonlein purpura, some of the body's small blood vessels become inflamed, which can cause bleeding in the skin, abdomen and kidneys. It's not clear why this initial inflammation develops. It may be the result of the immune system responding inappropriately to certain triggers.Nearly half the people who have Henoch-Schonlein purpura developed it after an upper respiratory infection, such as a cold. Other triggers include chickenpox, strep throat, measles, hepatitis, certain medications, food, insect bites and exposure to cold weather.Factors that increase the risk of developing Henoch-Schonlein purpura include:For most people, symptoms improve within a month, leaving no lasting problems. But recurrences are fairly common.Complications associated with Henoch-Schonlein purpura include:Sep 21, 2021CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.