Hepatitis A is a highly contagious liver infection caused by the hepatitis A virus. The virus is one of several types of hepatitis viruses that cause liver inflammation and affect your liver's ability to function.You're most likely to get hepatitis A from contaminated food or water or from close contact with a person or object that's infected. Mild cases of hepatitis A don't require treatment. Most people who are infected recover completely with no permanent liver damage.Practicing good hygiene, including washing hands frequently, can prevent the spread of the virus. The hepatitis A vaccine can protect against hepatitis A.Hepatitis A symptoms typically appear a few weeks after you've had the virus. But not everyone with hepatitis A develops symptoms. If you do, symptoms can include:These symptoms may be relatively mild and go away in a few weeks. Sometimes, however, hepatitis A results in a severe illness that lasts several months.Make an appointment with your health care provider if you have symptoms of hepatitis A.Getting the hepatitis A vaccine or an injection of an antibody called immunoglobulin within two weeks of exposure to the hepatitis A virus may protect you from infection.Ask your health care provider or your local health department about receiving the hepatitis A vaccine if:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care.If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.Please, try again in a couple of minutesHepatitis A is caused by a virus that infects liver cells and causes inflammation. The inflammation can affect how your liver works and cause other symptoms of hepatitis A.The virus spreads when infected stool, even just tiny amounts, enters the mouth of another person (fecal-oral transmission). You may get hepatitis A when you eat or drink something contaminated with infected stool. You may also get the infection through close contact with a person who has hepatitis A. The virus can live on surfaces for a few months. The virus does not spread through casual contact or by sneezing or coughing.Here are some of the specific ways the hepatitis A virus can spread:You're at increased risk of hepatitis A if you:Unlike other types of viral hepatitis, hepatitis A does not cause long-term liver damage, and it doesn't become an ongoing (chronic) infection.In rare cases, hepatitis A can cause a sudden (acute) loss of liver function, especially in older adults or people with chronic liver diseases. Acute liver failure requires a stay in the hospital for monitoring and treatment. Some people with acute liver failure may need a liver transplant.The hepatitis A vaccine can prevent infection with the virus. The vaccine is typically given in two shots. The first shot is followed by a booster shot six months later. The hepatitis A vaccine can be given in a combination that includes the hepatitis B vaccine. This vaccine combination is given in three shots over six months.The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends the hepatitis A vaccine for the following people:If you're concerned about your risk of hepatitis A, ask your health care provider if you should be vaccinated.If you're traveling to parts of the world where hepatitis A outbreaks occur, take these steps to prevent infection:Thoroughly wash your hands often, especially after using the toilet or changing a diaper and before preparing food or eating.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship