Hepatitis B is a serious liver infection caused by the hepatitis B virus (HBV). For most people, hepatitis B is short term, also called acute, and lasts less than six months. But for others, the infection becomes chronic, meaning it lasts more than six months. Having chronic hepatitis B increases your risk of developing liver failure, liver cancer or cirrhosis — a condition that permanently scars the liver.Most adults with hepatitis B recover fully, even if their symptoms are severe. Infants and children are more likely to develop a long-lasting hepatitis B infection. This is known as a chronic infection.A vaccine can prevent hepatitis B, but there's no cure if you have the condition. If you're infected, taking certain precautions can help prevent spreading the virus to others.Symptoms of acute hepatitis B range from mild to severe. They usually appear about 1 to 4 months after you've been infected, although you could see them as early as two weeks after you're infected. Some people, usually young children, may not have any symptoms.Hepatitis B signs and symptoms may include:If you know you've been exposed to hepatitis B, contact your health care provider immediately. A preventive treatment may reduce your risk of infection if you receive the treatment within 24 hours of exposure to the virus.If you think you have symptoms of hepatitis B, contact your health care provider.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care.If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.Please, try again in a couple of minutesHepatitis B infection is caused by the hepatitis B virus (HBV). The virus is passed from person to person through blood, semen or other body fluids. It does not spread by sneezing or coughing.Common ways that HBV can spread are:Hepatitis B infection may be short-lived, also called acute. Or it might last a long time, also known as chronic.The younger you are when you get hepatitis B — particularly newborns or children younger than 5 — the higher your risk of the infection becoming chronic. Chronic infection may go undetected for decades until a person becomes seriously ill from liver disease.Hepatitis B spreads through contact with blood, semen or other body fluids from an infected person. Your risk of hepatitis B infection increases if you:Having a chronic HBV infection can lead to serious complications, such as:The hepatitis B vaccine is typically given as two injections separated by a month or three or four injections over six months, depending on which vaccine is given. You can't get hepatitis B from the vaccine. The hepatitis B vaccine is recommended by the United States Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices for adults 19 to 59 years of age who do not have a contraindication to the vaccine.The hepatitis B vaccine is also strongly recommended for:Other ways to reduce your risk of HBV include:Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Transplants support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.1606 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 15 Replies Fri, Jun 21, 2024 100 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Sexual contact.Sharing of needles.Accidental needle sticks.Mother to child.Acute hepatitis B infectionChronic hepatitis B infectionScarring of the liver (cirrhosis).Liver cancer.Liver failure.Reactivation of the hepatitis B virus.Other conditions.Know the HBV status of any sexual partner.Use a new latex or polyurethane condom every time you have sexDon't use illegal drugs.Be cautious about body piercing and tattooing.Ask about the hepatitis B vaccine before you travel.Advertising & Sponsorship