Learn more from Mohamad Bydon, M.D.Hello. I'm Dr. Mohamad Bydon, a neurosurgeon at Mayo Clinic. In this video, we'll cover the basics of disk herniation. What is it? Who gets it? The symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment. Whether you're looking for answers for yourself or someone you love, we're here to give you the best information available. Your spine is a stack of bones known as vertebrae, and between these bones are small rubbery disks that act as cushions. They have a soft jelly-like center or nucleus that is encased by a tougher rubbery exterior. Sometimes the exterior of these rubbery disks can tear, and the soft inside slips out. This results in a herniated disk, also known as a slipped disk or ruptured disk. This disk injury can irritate nearby nerves causing pain, numbness, or weakness in an arm or a leg. Many people with a slipped disk never experience symptoms and surgery is rarely required to fix the problem. Nonetheless, there are a range of treatments available to help those who suffer pain or discomfort from a herniated disk.In most cases, a slipped disk happens because of wear and tear, something known as disk degeneration as you age. Your disks become less flexible and are more prone to tears and ruptures. Most people cannot identify the cause of their herniated disk. It can happen from using your back muscles instead of your leg and thigh muscles to lift heavy a object. Or from awkwardly twisting and turning. That said, there are other factors outside of your age that can increase your risk of slipping a disk. Being overweight increases the strain on the disks in your lower back. Some people may be genetically predisposed to rupturing a disk. Working a physically demanding job, and smoking can decrease the oxygen supply to your disk, causing it to degenerate more rapidly.It's possible to have a herniated disk without having any symptoms. This happens to a lot of people. They may first learn about a herniated disk while undergoing tests for a different issue. Slip disks can trigger a few classic symptoms. Arm or leg pain often described as a sharp or shooting pain. Pain in your buttocks, thighs, calf, even your foot, numbness or tingling. Your exact symptoms depend on where the herniated disk is located, whether it's pressing on a nerve. Talking to a doctor about the pain that you're experiencing is always a smart move.Your doctor will usually be able to tell if you have a herniated disk by conducting a physical exam, asking about your medical history. They may ask you to lie flat, move your legs into various positions. They may also check your reflexes, muscle strength, walking ability, see if you can feel light touch, pinprick vibration. If your doctor thinks another condition is causing the pain or needs to see which nerves are being affected by the slipped disk, they may order one or more of the following; an X-ray, a CT scan, an MRI, rarely a myelogram. Your medical team may perform a nerve test like a nerve conduction study or an EMG to help pinpoint the location of the nerve damage.More often than not, watching your movement, and taking pain medication relieves symptoms for most people. Over-the-counter pain relievers like acetaminophen, ibuprofen, naproxen are great options for mild-to-moderate pain. If your pain is severe, your doctor might recommend a cortisone injection or muscle relaxers. In rare cases, opioids may be prescribed for a short period of time when other treatments have not worked. Physical therapy can also help manage pain with positions, stretches, and exercises designed to minimize the discomfort caused by a herniated disk. Few people with a slipped disk ever need surgery, but when it's necessary, surgeons may perform what's known as a diskectomy. This may be done in an open manner or in a minimally invasive manner. The protruding portion of the disk is removed. Sometimes in cases of spinal instability, a bone graft is needed where the vertebrae are fused together with metal hardware. In rare circumstances, a surgeon may implant an artificial disk to replace the herniated one.If you think you have a herniated disk, talk to your doctor, come prepared, try to figure out when your symptoms started, how you may have injured it, and what, if anything, helps improve your symptoms. Back injuries are incredibly common. Thankfully, most people find a way to manage their pain and are able to return to normal activity in no time. If you'd like to learn more about disk herniation, watch our other related videos or visit mayoclinic.org. We wish you well.A herniated disk refers to a problem with one of the rubbery cushions, called disks, that sit between the bones that stack to make the spine. These bones are called vertebrae.A spinal disk has a soft, jellylike center called a nucleus. The nucleus is encased in a tougher, rubbery exterior, known as the annulus. A herniated disk occurs when some of the nucleus pushes out through a tear in the annulus. A herniated disk is sometimes called a slipped disk or a ruptured disk.A herniated disk, which can occur in any part of the spine, most often occurs in the lower back. Depending on where the herniated disk is, it can result in pain, numbness or weakness in an arm or a leg.Many people have no symptoms from a herniated disk. For people who do have symptoms, the symptoms tend to improve over time. Surgery is usually not needed to relieve the problem.The disks that lie between the vertebrae in the spine consist of a soft center (nucleus) surrounded by a tougher exterior (annulus). A herniated disk occurs when a portion of the nucleus pushes through a crack in the annulus. Symptoms may occur if the herniation compresses a nerve.Most herniated disks occur in the lower back, but they also can occur in the neck. Symptoms depend on where the disk is sitting and whether the disk is pressing on a nerve. Herniated disks often affect one side of the body.Arm or leg pain. If your herniated disk is in your lower back, you'll typically feel pain in your lower back, buttocks, thigh and calf. You might have pain in part of your foot as well.For a herniated disk in your neck, you'll typically feel the most pain in your shoulder and arm. This pain might shoot into your arm or leg when you cough, sneeze or move into certain positions. Pain is often described as sharp or burning.You can have a herniated disk without symptoms. You might not know you have it unless it shows up on a spinal image.Seek medical care if your neck or back pain travels down your arm or leg, or if you also have numbness, tingling or weakness.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesDisk herniation is most often the result of a gradual, aging-related wear and tear called disk degeneration. As people age, the disks become less flexible and more prone to tearing or rupturing with even a minor strain or twist.Most people can't pinpoint the cause of their herniated disk. Sometimes, using the back muscles instead of the leg and thigh muscles to lift heavy objects can lead to a herniated disk. Twisting and turning while lifting also can cause a herniated disk. Rarely, a traumatic event such as a fall or a blow to the back is the cause.Factors that can increase the risk of a herniated disk include:Just above your waist, your spinal cord ends. What continues through the spinal canal is a group of long nerve roots that resembles a horse's tail, called the cauda equina.Rarely, disk herniation can compress the entire spinal canal, including all the nerves of the cauda equina. In rare instances, emergency surgery might be needed to avoid permanent weakness or paralysis.Seek emergency medical attention if you have:To help prevent a herniated disk, do the following:Our patients tell us that the quality of their interactions, our attention to detail and the efficiency of their visits mean health care like they've never experienced. See the stories of satisfied Mayo Clinic patients.Edward Markle was desperate. Despite receiving nerve blocks from his doctors, Edward says the pain from two herniated discs had become excruciating and unrelenting. He could not sit or walk without pain. He slept on the floor, two hours a night. He was increasingly worried about the future. "It shut my quality of life down to almost zero," he says. "I couldn't move. I could not get out. I could not find a way to…Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Arm or leg pain.Numbness or tingling.Weakness.Weight.Occupation.Genetics.Smoking.Frequent driving.Being sedentary.Worsening symptoms.Bladder or bowel dysfunction.Saddle anesthesia.Exercise.Maintain good posture.Maintain a healthy weight.Quit smoking.Advertising & Sponsorship