A hiatal hernia occurs when the upper part of the stomach bulges through the diaphragm into the chest cavity.A hiatal hernia happens when the upper part of the stomach bulges through the large muscle that separates the abdomen and the chest. The muscle is called the diaphragm.The diaphragm has a small opening called a hiatus. The tube used for swallowing food, called the esophagus, passes through the hiatus before connecting to the stomach. In a hiatal hernia, the stomach pushes up through that opening and into the chest.A small hiatal hernia usually doesn't cause problems. You may never know you have one unless your healthcare team discovers it when checking for another condition.But a large hiatal hernia can allow food and acid to back up into your esophagus. This can cause heartburn. Self-care measures or medicines can usually relieve these symptoms. A very large hiatal hernia might need surgery.Most small hiatal hernias cause no symptoms. But larger hiatal hernias can cause:Make an appointment with your doctor or other healthcare professional if you have any lasting symptoms that worry you.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care.If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.Please, try again in a couple of minutesA hiatal hernia occurs when weakened muscle tissue allows your stomach to bulge up through your diaphragm. It's not always clear why this happens. But a hiatal hernia might be caused by:Hiatal hernias are most common in people who are:Hiatal hernia care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship