A hip fracture is a serious injury, with complications that can be life-threatening. The risk of hip fracture rises with age.Risk increases because bones tend to weaken with age (osteoporosis). Multiple medications, poor vision and balance problems also make older people more likely to fall — one of the most common causes of hip fracture.A hip fracture almost always requires surgical repair or replacement, followed by physical therapy. Taking steps to maintain bone density and avoid falls can help prevent a hip fracture.Signs and symptoms of a hip fracture include:A severe impact, such as a car crash, can cause hip fractures in people of all ages. In older adults, a hip fracture is most often a result of a fall from a standing height. In people with very weak bones, a hip fracture can occur simply by standing on the leg and twisting.Many things can increase the risk of hip fractures.Bone density and muscle mass tend to decrease with age. Older people can also have problems with vision and balance, which can increase the risk of falling.Hip fractures occur in women about three times more often than they do in men. Women lose bone density faster than men do, in part because the drop in estrogen levels that occurs with menopause accelerates bone loss. However, men also can develop dangerously low levels of bone density.The risk of hip fracture can be increased if you have:Cortisone medications, such as prednisone, can weaken bones if taken long-term. Certain drugs or certain combinations of medications can cause dizziness, which can increase the risk of falling. The most common drugs associated with falls include sleep medications, antipsychotics and sedatives.Lack of calcium and vitamin D in the diet of young people lowers peak bone mass and increases risk of fracture later in life. It's also important to get enough calcium and vitamin D in older age to try to maintain bone density. Being underweight also increases the risk of bone loss.Lack of regular weight-bearing exercise, such as walking, can result in weakened bones and muscles, making falls and fractures more likely.Tobacco and alcohol both can interfere with the normal processes of bone building and maintenance, resulting in bone loss.A hip fracture can reduce independence and sometimes shorten life. About half the people who have a hip fracture aren't able to regain the ability to live independently.When hip fractures prevent movement for a long time, complications can include:Healthy lifestyle choices in early adulthood build a higher peak bone mass and reduce the risk of osteoporosis in later years. The same measures adopted at any age might lower the risk of falls and improve overall health.To avoid falls and to maintain healthy bone:May 05, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.