A hip labral tear involves the ring of cartilage (labrum) that follows the outside rim of the hip joint socket. Besides cushioning the hip joint, the labrum acts like a rubber seal or gasket to help hold the ball at the top of the thighbone securely within the hip socket.Athletes who participate in sports such as ice hockey, soccer, football, golf and ballet are at higher risk of developing hip labral tears. Structural problems of the hip also can lead to a hip labral tear. Hip labral tears are more common in people who play certain sports or who have structural problems of the hip. If conservative treatments don't help, a health care provider may suggest surgery to repair the torn labrum. Many hip labral tears cause no signs or symptoms. Some people, however, have one or more of the following:Seek medical attention if symptoms worsen or don't improve within six weeks.The cause of a hip labral tear might be:Structural problems. Some people are born with hip issues that can accelerate wear and tear of the joint and eventually cause a hip labral tear. This can include having a socket that doesn't fully cover the ball portion of the upper thigh bone (dysplasia) or a shallow socket, which can put more stress on the labrum.Extra bone in the hip, called femoroacetabular impingement (FAI), can also cause pinching of the labrum, which can lead to tearing over time.Anyone can get a hip labral tear, but certain conditions and activities increase the risk.People with structural problems in the hip such as impingement, dysplasia or loose ligaments are more likely to develop a hip labral tear over time.Participating in certain activities that involve repetitive or twisting motions can increase the risk of a hip labral tear. These include sports such as ballet, golf and swimming. Playing contact sports such as football and hockey also increase the risk of hip injuries, including hip labral tears.A hip labral tear can make it more likely that you'll develop osteoarthritis in that joint.If the sports you play put a lot of strain on your hips, condition the surrounding muscles with strength and flexibility exercises.Feb 01, 2024CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.