Hirschsprung's (HIRSH-sproongz) disease is a condition that affects the large intestine (colon) and causes problems with passing stool. The condition is present at birth (congenital) as a result of missing nerve cells in the muscles of the baby's colon. Without these nerve cells stimulating gut muscles to help move contents through the colon, the contents can back up and cause blockages in the bowel.A newborn who has Hirschsprung's disease usually can't have a bowel movement in the days after birth. In mild cases, the condition might not be detected until later in childhood. Uncommonly, Hirschsprung's disease is first diagnosed in adults.Surgery to bypass or remove the diseased part of the colon is the treatment. In children with Hirschsprung's disease, nerves fail to form in all or part of the large intestine (colon). Waste from digestion cannot pass through the part of the colon lacking nerve tissue. The normal colon swells with blocked stool. Signs and symptoms of Hirschsprung's disease vary with the severity of the condition. Usually signs and symptoms appear shortly after birth, but sometimes they're not apparent until later in life.Typically, the most obvious sign is a newborn's failure to have a bowel movement within 48 hours after birth.Other signs and symptoms in newborns may include:In older children, signs and symptoms can include:It's not clear what causes Hirschsprung's disease. It sometimes occurs in families and might, in some cases, be associated with a genetic mutation.Hirschsprung's disease occurs when nerve cells in the colon don't form completely. Nerves in the colon control the muscle contractions that move food through the bowels. Without the contractions, stool stays in the large intestine.Factors that may increase the risk of Hirschsprung's disease include:Children who have Hirschsprung's disease are prone to a serious intestinal infection called enterocolitis. Enterocolitis can be life-threatening and requires immediate treatment.Aug 21, 2021CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.