Histoplasmosis is an infection caused by breathing in spores of a fungus often found in bird and bat droppings. People usually get it from breathing in these spores when they become airborne during demolition or cleanup projects.Soil contaminated by bird or bat droppings also can spread histoplasmosis, putting farmers and landscapers at a higher risk of the disease. In the United States, histoplasmosis commonly occurs in the Mississippi and Ohio River valleys. But it can occur in other areas, too. It also occurs in Africa, Asia, Australia, and in parts of Central and South America.Most people with histoplasmosis never develop symptoms and aren't aware they're infected. But for some people — mainly infants and those with weakened immune systems — histoplasmosis can be serious. Treatments are available for even the most severe forms of histoplasmosis.The mildest forms of histoplasmosis cause no signs or symptoms. But severe infections can be life-threatening. When signs and symptoms occur, they usually appear 3 to 17 days after exposure and can include:Some people with histoplasmosis also get joint pain and a rash. People who have a lung disease, such as emphysema, can develop chronic histoplasmosis.Signs of chronic histoplasmosis can include weight loss and a bloody cough. Chronic histoplasmosis symptoms sometimes mimic those of tuberculosis.The most severe variety of histoplasmosis occurs mainly in infants and in people with weakened immune systems. Called disseminated histoplasmosis, it can affect nearly any part of your body, including your mouth, liver, central nervous system, skin and adrenal glands. If untreated, disseminated histoplasmosis is usually fatal.Contact your health care provider if you develop flu-like symptoms after being exposed to bird or bat droppings — especially if you have a weakened immune system.Histoplasmosis is caused by the reproductive cells (spores) of the fungus Histoplasma capsulatum. They float into the air when dirt or other material is disturbed.The fungus thrives in damp soil that's rich in organic material, especially the droppings from birds and bats. It's particularly common in chicken and pigeon coops, old barns, caves, and parks.Histoplasmosis isn't contagious, so it can't be spread from person to person. If you've had histoplasmosis, you can get it again. However, if you do get it again, the illness will likely be milder the second time.The chances of developing histoplasmosis symptoms increase with the number of spores you inhale. People more likely to be exposed include:Children younger than age 2 and adults age 55 and older have weaker immune systems. Because of this, they're more likely to develop disseminated histoplasmosis — the most serious form of the disease. Other factors that can weaken your immune system include:Histoplasmosis can cause many serious complications, even in otherwise healthy people. For infants, older adults and people with weakened immune systems, the potential problems are often life-threatening.Complications can include:It's difficult to prevent exposure to the fungus that causes histoplasmosis, especially in areas where the disease is widespread. But taking the following steps might help reduce the risk of infection:Mar 24, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.