Illustration of hives on different skin colors. Hives can cause swollen, itchy welts. Hives is also called urticaria.Illustration of angioedema on different skin colors. Angioedema causes swelling in the deeper layers of skin, often of the face and lips. It often goes away within a day.Hives — also known as urticaria (ur-tih-KAR-e-uh) — is a skin reaction that causes itchy welts that range in size from small spots to large blotches. Hives can be triggered by many situations and substances, including certain foods and medications.Angioedema can arise with hives or alone. It causes swelling in the deeper layers of skin, often around the face and lips. Short-lived (acute) hives and angioedema are common. Most times, they are harmless, clear up within in a day and don't leave any lasting marks, even without treatment. Hives that last longer than six weeks are called chronic hives.Hives and angioedema are usually treated with antihistamine medication. Angioedema can be life-threatening if swelling of the tongue or in the throat blocks the airway.The welts associated with hives can be:Most hives appear quickly and go away within 24 hours. This is known as acute hives. Chronic hives can last for months or years.Angioedema is a reaction similar to hives that affects deeper layers of the skin. It can appear with hives or alone. Signs and symptoms include:You can usually treat mild cases of hives or angioedema at home. See your health care provider if your symptoms continue for more than a few days.If you think your hives or angioedema was caused by a known allergy to food or a medication, your symptoms may be an early sign of an anaphylactic reaction. Seek emergency care if you feel your tongue, lips, mouth or throat swelling or if you're having trouble breathing.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesFor most people who experience acute hives and angioedema, the exact cause can't be identified. The conditions are sometimes caused by:Hives and angioedema are common. You may be at increased risk of hives and angioedema if you:Severe angioedema can be life-threatening if swelling of the tongue or in the throat blocks the airway.To lower your likelihood of experiencing hives or angioedema, take the following precautions:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Foods.Medications.Airborne allergens.Insect bites and infections.Avoid known triggers.Bathe and change your clothes.Advertising & Sponsorship