The lymphatic system is part of the body's immune system, which protects against infection and disease. The lymphatic system includes the spleen, thymus, lymph nodes and lymph channels, as well as the tonsils and adenoids.Lymph nodes are bean-sized collections of cells called lymphocytes. Hundreds of these nodes cluster throughout the lymphatic system, for example, near the knee, groin, neck and armpits. The nodes are connected by a network of lymphatic vessels.Hodgkin lymphoma is a type of cancer that affects the lymphatic system. The lymphatic system is part of the body's germ-fighting and disease-fighting immune system. Hodgkin lymphoma begins when healthy cells in the lymphatic system change and grow out of control.The lymphatic system includes lymph nodes. They are found throughout the body. Most lymph nodes are in the abdomen, groin, pelvis, chest, underarms and neck.The lymphatic system also includes the spleen, thymus, tonsils and bone marrow. Hodgkin lymphoma can affect all these areas and other organs in the body.Hodgkin lymphoma, which used to be called Hodgkin disease, is one of two broad types of lymphoma. The other is non-Hodgkin lymphoma.Advances in diagnosis and treatment of Hodgkin lymphoma have helped give people with this disease the chance for a full recovery.One of the most common places to find swollen lymph nodes is in the neck. The inset shows three swollen lymph nodes below the lower jaw.Signs and symptoms of Hodgkin lymphoma may include:Make an appointment with a doctor or other healthcare professional if you have ongoing symptoms that worry you. Hodgkin lymphoma symptoms are like those of many more-common conditions, such as infections. The healthcare professional may check for those causes first.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Subscribe for free and receive an in-depth guide to coping with cancer, plus helpful information on how to get a second opinion. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview.ErrorSelect a topicErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.Your in-depth coping with cancer guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest about cancer news, research, and care.If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.Please, try again in a couple of minutesHealthcare professionals aren't sure what causes Hodgkin lymphoma. It begins with changes in the DNA of a disease-fighting blood cell called a lymphocyte. A cell's DNA contains the instructions that tell the cell what to do.The DNA changes tell the cells to multiply quickly and live when other cells would naturally die. The Hodgkin lymphoma cells attract many healthy immune system cells to protect them and help them grow. The extra cells crowd into the lymph nodes and cause swelling and other symptoms.There are multiple types of Hodgkin lymphoma. The type of lymphoma you have is based on the characteristics of the cells involved in your disease and their behavior. The type of lymphoma you have helps determine your treatment options.Classical Hodgkin lymphoma is the more common type of this disease. People diagnosed with this type have large lymphoma cells called Reed-Sternberg cells in their lymph nodes.Subtypes of classical Hodgkin lymphoma include:This type of Hodgkin lymphoma is much rarer. It involves lymphoma cells sometimes called popcorn cells because of how they look. Usually, it is diagnosed early and may need less intensive treatments than the classical type of Hodgkin lymphoma.Factors that can increase the risk of Hodgkin lymphoma include:There's no way to prevent Hodgkin lymphoma.Hodgkin lymphoma (Hodgkin disease) care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Adolescent & Young Adult (AYA) Cancer support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.4 Replies Tue, Jun 04, 2024 1 Replies Tue, Jun 04, 2024 3 Replies Thu, May 23, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Your age.A family history of Hodgkin lymphoma.Being male.Past Epstein-Barr infection.HIV infection.Advertising & Sponsorship