Horner syndrome is a condition that affects the face and eye on one side of the body. It is caused by the disruption of a nerve pathway from the brain to the head and neck. Decreased eye pupil size is a key sign of Horner syndrome. Typically, signs and symptoms of Horner syndrome include decreased pupil size, a drooping eyelid and decreased sweating on the affected side of the face.Horner syndrome may be the result of another medical problem, such as a stroke, tumor or spinal cord injury. In some cases, no underlying cause can be found. There's no specific treatment for Horner syndrome, but treatment for the underlying cause may restore nerve function.Horner syndrome is also known as Bernard-Horner syndrome or oculosympathetic palsy.Horner syndrome usually affects only one side of the face. Common signs and symptoms include:Signs and symptoms, particularly ptosis and anhidrosis, may be subtle and difficult to detect.Additional signs and symptoms in children with Horner syndrome may include:A number of factors, some more serious than others, can cause Horner syndrome. It is important to get a prompt and accurate diagnosis.Get emergency care if signs or symptoms associated with Horner syndrome appear suddenly, appear after a traumatic injury, or are accompanied by other signs or symptoms, such as:Horner syndrome is caused by damage to a certain pathway in the sympathetic nervous system. The sympathetic nervous system regulates heart rate, pupil size, perspiration, blood pressure and other functions that enable you to respond quickly to changes in your environment.The nerve pathway affected by Horner syndrome is divided into three groups of nerve cells (neurons).This neuron pathway leads from the hypothalamus at the base of the brain, passes through the brainstem and extends into the upper portion of the spinal cord. Problems in this region that can disrupt nerve function related to Horner syndrome include:This neuron path extends from the spinal column, across the upper part of the chest and into the side of the neck. Causes related to nerve damage in this region may include:This neuron path extends along the side of the neck and leads to facial skin and muscles of the iris and eyelids. Nerve damage in this region may be associated with the following:The most common causes of Horner syndrome in children include:In some cases, the cause of Horner syndrome cannot be identified. This is known as idiopathic Horner syndrome.May 13, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.