Huntington's disease causes nerve cells in the brain to decay over time. The disease affects a person's movements, thinking ability and mental health.Huntington's disease is rare. It's often passed down through a changed gene from a parent.Huntington's disease symptoms can develop at any time, but they often begin when people are in their 30s or 40s. If the disease develops before age 20, it's called juvenile Huntington's disease. When Huntington's develops early, symptoms can be different and the disease may have a faster progression.Medicines are available to help manage the symptoms of Huntington's disease. However, treatments can't prevent the physical, mental and behavioral decline caused by the disease.Huntington's disease usually causes movement disorders. It also causes mental health conditions and trouble with thinking and planning. These conditions can cause a wide spectrum of symptoms. The first symptoms vary greatly from person to person. Some symptoms appear to be worse or have a greater effect on functional ability. These symptoms may change in severity throughout the course of the disease.The movement disorders related to Huntington's disease may cause movements that can't be controlled, called chorea. Chorea are involuntary movements affecting all the muscles of the body, specifically the arms and legs, the face and the tongue. They also can affect the ability to make voluntary movements. Symptoms may include:People with Huntington's disease also may not be able to control voluntary movements. This can have a greater impact than the involuntary movements caused by the disease. Having trouble with voluntary movements can affect a person's ability to work, perform daily activities, communicate and remain independent.Huntington's disease often causes trouble with cognitive skills. These symptoms may include:The most common mental health condition associated with Huntington's disease is depression. This isn't simply a reaction to receiving a diagnosis of Huntington's disease. Instead, depression appears to occur because of damage to the brain and changes in brain function. Symptoms may include:Other common mental health conditions include:Weight loss also is common in people with Huntington's disease, especially as the disease gets worse.In younger people, Huntington's disease begins and progresses slightly differently than it does in adults. Symptoms that may appear early in the course of the disease include:See your healthcare professional if you notice changes in your movements, emotional state or mental ability. The symptoms of Huntington's disease also can be caused by a number of different conditions. Therefore, it's important to get a prompt and thorough diagnosis.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesIn an autosomal dominant disorder, the changed gene is a dominant gene. It's located on one of the nonsex chromosomes, called autosomes. Only one changed gene is needed for someone to be affected by this type of condition. A person with an autosomal dominant condition — in this example, the father — has a 50% chance of having an affected child with one changed gene and a 50% chance of having an unaffected child.Huntington's disease is caused by a difference in a single gene that's passed down from a parent. Huntington's disease follows an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. This means that a person needs only one copy of the nontypical gene to develop the disorder.With the exception of genes on the sex chromosomes, a person inherits two copies of every gene — one copy from each parent. A parent with a nontypical gene could pass along the nontypical copy of the gene or the healthy copy. Each child in the family, therefore, has a 50 percent chance of inheriting the gene that causes the genetic condition.People who have a parent with Huntington's disease are at risk of having the disease themselves. Children of a parent with Huntington's have a 50 percent chance of having the gene change that causes Huntington's.After Huntington's disease starts, a person's ability to function gradually gets worse over time. How quickly the disease gets worse and how long it takes varies. The time from the first symptoms to death is often about 10 to 30 years. Juvenile Huntington's disease usually results in death within 10 to 15 years after symptoms develop.The depression linked with Huntington's disease may increase the risk of suicide. Some research suggests that risk of suicide is greater before a diagnosis and also when a person loses independence.Eventually, a person with Huntington's disease requires help with all activities of daily living and care. Late in the disease, the person will likely be confined to a bed and unable to speak. Someone with Huntington's disease is generally able to understand language and has an awareness of family and friends, though some won't recognize family members.Common causes of death include:People with a known family history of Huntington's disease may be concerned about whether they may pass the Huntington gene on to their children. They might consider genetic testing and family planning options.If an at-risk parent is considering genetic testing, it can be helpful to meet with a genetic counselor. A genetic counselor explains the potential risks of a positive test result, which may mean that the parent may develop the disease. Also, couples may need to make additional choices about whether to have children or to consider alternatives. They may decide to choose prenatal testing for the gene or in vitro fertilization with donor sperm or eggs.Another option for couples is in vitro fertilization and preimplantation genetic diagnosis. In this process, eggs are removed from the ovaries and fertilized with the father's sperm in a laboratory. The embryos are tested for the presence of the Huntington gene. Only those testing negative for the Huntington gene are implanted in the mother's uterus.During in vitro fertilization, eggs are removed from sacs called follicles within an ovary (A). An egg is fertilized by injecting a single sperm into the egg or mixing the egg with sperm in a petri dish (B). The fertilized egg, called an embryo, is transferred into the uterus (C).Huntington's disease care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Obsessive-compulsive disorder,Mania,Bipolar disorder,Advertising & Sponsorship