Hurthle (HEERT-luh) cell cancer is a rare cancer that affects the thyroid gland.The thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland in the base of the neck. It secretes hormones that are essential for regulating the body's metabolism.Hurthle cell cancer is also called Hurthle cell carcinoma or oxyphilic cell carcinoma. This is one of several types of cancers that affect the thyroid.This type of cancer can be more aggressive than other types of thyroid cancer. Surgery to remove the thyroid gland is the most common treatment. The thyroid gland is located at the base of the neck, just below the Adam's apple. Hurthle cell cancer doesn't always cause symptoms, and it's sometimes detected during a physical examination or an imaging test done for some other reason.When they do occur, signs and symptoms may include:These signs and symptoms don't necessarily mean that you have Hurthle cell cancer. They may be indications of other medical conditions — such as inflammation of the thyroid gland or an enlargement of the thyroid (goiter).Make an appointment with your health care provider if you have any signs or symptoms that worry you.It's not clear what causes Hurthle cell cancer.This cancer begins when cells in the thyroid develop changes in their DNA. A cell's DNA contains the instructions that tell a cell what to do. The DNA changes, which doctors call mutations, tell the thyroid cells to grow and multiply quickly. The cells develop the ability to continue living when other cells would naturally die. The accumulating cells form a mass called a tumor that can invade and destroy healthy tissue nearby and spread (metastasize) to other parts of the body.Factors that increase the risk of developing thyroid cancer include:Possible complications of Hurthle cell cancer include:Mar 01, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.