Hydrocephalus is the buildup of fluid in cavities called ventricles deep within the brain. The excess fluid increases the size of the ventricles and puts pressure on the brain.Cerebrospinal fluid usually flows through the ventricles and bathes the brain and spinal column. But the pressure of too much cerebrospinal fluid can damage brain tissues and cause a range of symptoms related to brain function.Hydrocephalus can happen at any age, but it occurs more often among infants and among adults 60 and older. Surgery can restore and maintain healthy cerebrospinal fluid levels in the brain. Therapies can manage symptoms resulting from hydrocephalus.The symptoms of hydrocephalus can vary by age.Common symptoms of hydrocephalus in infants include:Among toddlers and older children, symptoms might include:Common symptoms in this age group include:Among adults 60 and older, the more common symptoms of hydrocephalus are:Seek emergency medical care for infants and toddlers with these symptoms:Seek prompt medical attention for other hydrocephalus symptoms in any age group.More than one condition can cause the problems associated with hydrocephalus. It's important to get a timely diagnosis and appropriate care.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesYour brain floats in a bath of cerebrospinal fluid. This fluid also fills large open structures, called ventricles, which lie deep inside your brain. The fluid-filled ventricles help keep the brain buoyant and cushioned.Hydrocephalus is caused by an imbalance between how much cerebrospinal fluid is produced and how much is absorbed into the bloodstream.Tissues lining the ventricles of the brain produce cerebrospinal fluid. It flows through the ventricles by way of channels. The fluid eventually flows into spaces around the brain and spinal column. It's absorbed primarily by blood vessels in tissues on the surface of the brain.Cerebrospinal fluid plays an important role in brain function by:Too much cerebrospinal fluid in the ventricles can occur for one of the following reasons:Much of the time, the cause of hydrocephalus is not known. However, developmental or medical problems can contribute to or trigger hydrocephalus.Hydrocephalus may be present at or before birth, known as congenital hydrocephalus. Or it can occur shortly after birth. Any of the following incidents may cause hydrocephalus in newborns:Other factors that can contribute to hydrocephalus among any age group include:In most cases, hydrocephalus worsens. Without treatment, hydrocephalus leads to complications. Complications may include learning disabilities or developmental and physical disabilities. Complications of this condition also can result in death. When hydrocephalus is mild and it's treated, there may be few, if any, serious complications.Hydrocephalus care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Seek emergency medical care for infants and toddlersSeek prompt medical attentionObstruction.Poor absorption.Overproduction.Advertising & Sponsorship