Hyperthyroidism happens when the thyroid gland makes too much thyroid hormone. This condition also is called overactive thyroid. Hyperthyroidism speeds up the body's metabolism. That can cause many symptoms, such as weight loss, hand tremors, and rapid or irregular heartbeat.Several treatments are available for hyperthyroidism. Anti-thyroid medicines and radioiodine can be used to slow the amount of hormones the thyroid gland makes. Sometimes, hyperthyroidism treatment includes surgery to remove all or part of the thyroid gland. In some cases, depending on what's causing it, hyperthyroidism may improve without medication or other treatment.Hyperthyroidism sometimes looks like other health problems. That can make it hard to diagnose. It can cause many symptoms, including:Older adults are more likely to have symptoms that are hard to notice. These symptoms may include an irregular heartbeat, weight loss, depression, and feeling weak or tired during ordinary activities.If you lose weight without trying, or if you notice a rapid heartbeat, unusual sweating, swelling at the base of your neck or other symptoms of hyperthyroidism, make an appointment with your health care provider. Tell your provider about all the symptoms you've noticed even if they are minor.After a diagnosis of hyperthyroidism, most people need regular follow-up visits with their health care provider to monitor the condition.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe thyroid gland sits at the base of the neck.Hyperthyroidism can be caused by several medical conditions that affect the thyroid gland. The thyroid is a small, butterfly-shaped gland at the base of the neck. It has a big impact on the body. Every part of metabolism is controlled by hormones that the thyroid gland makes.The thyroid gland produces two main hormones: thyroxine (T-4) and triiodothyronine (T-3). These hormones affect every cell in the body. They support the rate at which the body uses fats and carbohydrates. They help control body temperature. They have an effect on heart rate. And they help control how much protein the body makes.Hyperthyroidism happens when the thyroid gland puts too much of those thyroid hormones into the bloodstream. Conditions that can lead to hyperthyroidism include:Risk factors for hyperthyroidism include:Hyperthyroidism can lead to the following complications.Some of the most serious complications of hyperthyroidism involve the heart, including:Untreated hyperthyroidism can lead to weak, brittle bones. This condition is called osteoporosis. The strength of bones depends, in part, on the amount of calcium and other minerals in them. Too much thyroid hormone makes it hard for the body to get calcium into bones.Some people with hyperthyroidism develop a problem called thyroid eye disease. It's more common in people who smoke. This disorder affects the muscles and other tissues around the eyes.Symptoms of thyroid eye disease include:Eye problems that go untreated may cause vision loss.In rare cases, people with Graves' disease develop Graves' dermopathy. This causes the skin to change colors and swell, often on the shins and feet.This rare condition also is called thyroid storm. Hyperthyroidism raises the risk of thyrotoxic crisis. It causes severe, sometimes life-threatening symptoms. It requires emergency medical care. Symptoms may include:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Graves' disease.Overactive thyroid nodules.Thyroiditis.Advertising & Sponsorship