Hyperoxaluria (hi-pur-ok-suh-LU-ree-uh) happens when you have too much oxalate in your urine. Oxalate is a natural chemical the body makes. It's also found in some foods. But too much oxalate in the urine can cause serious problems.Hyperoxaluria can be caused by a change in a gene, an intestine disease or eating too many foods that are high in oxalate. The long-term health of your kidneys depends on finding hyperoxaluria early and getting it treated quickly.Oxalosis (ok-suh-LOW-sis) happens after the kidneys stop working well in people who have primary and intestine-related causes of hyperoxaluria. Too much oxalate collects in the blood. This can lead to oxalate buildups in blood vessels, bones and organs.Often, the first sign of hyperoxaluria is a kidney stone. Kidney stone symptoms can include:It's not common for children to get kidney stones. Kidney stones that form in children and teenagers are likely to be caused by a health problem, such as hyperoxaluria.All young people with kidney stones should have a checkup. The checkup should include a test that measures oxalate in the urine. Adults who keep getting kidney stones also should be tested for oxalate in the urine.Hyperoxaluria happens when too much of a chemical called oxalate builds up in the urine. There are different types of hyperoxaluria:Primary hyperoxaluria. This type is a rare inherited disease, which means that it's passed down in families. It's caused by changes in a gene. With primary hyperoxaluria, the liver doesn't make enough of a certain protein that prevents too much oxalate from being made. Or the protein doesn't work as it should. The body gets rid of excess oxalate through the kidneys, in urine. The extra oxalate can combine with calcium to form kidney stones and crystals. These can damage the kidneys and cause them to stop working.With primary hyperoxaluria, kidney stones form early. They most often cause symptoms from childhood through age 20. The kidneys of many people with primary hyperoxaluria stop working well by early to middle adulthood. But kidney failure can happen even in babies with this disease. Others with primary hyperoxaluria may never have kidney failure.Enteric hyperoxaluria. Some intestine problems cause the body to absorb more oxalate from foods. This can then increase the amount of oxalate in the urine. Crohn's disease is one intestine problem that can lead to enteric hyperoxaluria. Another is short bowel syndrome, which can happen when parts of the small intestine are removed during surgery.Other health problems make it hard for the small intestine to absorb fats from food. If this happens, it might leave oxalate more available for the gut to absorb. Usually, oxalate combines with calcium in the gut and exits the body through stools. But when there is increased fat in the gut, calcium binds to the fat instead. This allows oxalate to be free in the gut and absorbed in the bloodstream. It's then filtered by the kidneys. Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery also can lead to trouble absorbing fat in the gut, which raises the risk of hyperoxaluria.Without treatment, primary hyperoxaluria can damage the kidneys. Over time the kidneys may stop working. This is called kidney failure. For some people, this is the first sign of the disease.Symptoms of kidney failure include:Oxalosis happens if you have primary or enteric hyperoxaluria and your kidneys stop working well enough. The body can no longer get rid of the extra oxalate, so the oxalate starts building up. First it builds up in the blood, then in the eyes, bones, skin, muscles, blood vessels, heart and other organs.Oxalosis can cause many health problems outside the kidneys in its late stages. These include:Hyperoxaluria and oxalosis care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Transplants support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.1606 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 15 Replies Fri, Jun 21, 2024 100 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Primary hyperoxaluria.Enteric hyperoxaluria.Hyperoxaluria tied to eating foods with lots of oxalate.Advertising & Sponsorship