In hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, the muscular heart wall called the septum often becomes thicker than usual. But the thickening can happen anywhere in the left lower heart chamber, also called the left ventricle.Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a disease in which the heart muscle becomes thickened, also called hypertrophied. The thickened heart muscle can make it harder for the heart to pump blood.Many people with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy don't realize they have it. That's because they have few, if any, symptoms. But in a small number of people with HCM, the thickened heart muscle can cause serious symptoms. These include shortness of breath and chest pain. Some people with HCM have changes in the heart's electrical system. These changes can result in life-threatening irregular heartbeats or sudden death.Symptoms of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy can include one or more of the following:Many conditions can cause shortness of breath and fast, pounding heartbeats. It's important to get a prompt checkup to find the cause and receive the right care. See your healthcare professional if you have a family history of HCM or any symptoms related to hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.Call 911 or your local emergency number if you have any of the following symptoms for more than a few minutes:Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy usually is caused by changes in genes that cause the heart muscle to thicken.Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy typically affects the wall between the two bottom chambers of the heart. This wall is called the septum. The chambers are called the ventricles. The thickened wall might block blood flow out of the heart. This is called obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.If there's no significant blocking of blood flow, the condition is called nonobstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. But the heart's main pumping chamber, called the left ventricle, might stiffen. This makes it hard for the heart to relax. The stiffness also lessens the amount of blood the ventricle can hold and send to the body with each heartbeat.Heart muscle cells also become arranged differently in people with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. This is called myofiber disarray. It can trigger irregular heartbeats in some people.Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy usually is passed down through families. That means it's inherited. People with one parent with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy have a 50% chance of having the gene change that causes the disease.Parents, children, or brothers or sisters of a person with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy should ask their healthcare team about screening tests for the disease.Complications of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy can include:There is no known way to prevent hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). It's important to find the condition with tests as early as possible to guide treatment and prevent complications.Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy usually is passed down in families. If you have a parent, brother, sister or child with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, ask your healthcare team if genetic screening is right for you. But not everyone with HCM has a gene change that tests can detect. Also, some insurance companies may not cover genetic testing.If genetic testing isn't done, or if the results aren't helpful, screening may be done with repeated echocardiograms. Echocardiograms use sound waves to make pictures of the heart.For people who have a family member with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy:You may need to have an echocardiogram more often based on your overall health and healthcare team's preference.Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (HCM) support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.736 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 9 Replies Wed, Jun 19, 2024 805 Replies Mon, Jun 17, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Atrial fibrillation (AFib).Blocked blood flow.Mitral valve disease.Dilated cardiomyopathy.Heart failure.Fainting, also called syncope.Sudden cardiac death.Advertising & Sponsorship