The four tiny parathyroid glands, which lie near the thyroid, make the parathyroid hormone. The hormone plays a role in controlling levels of the minerals calcium and phosphorus in the body.Hypercalcemia is a condition in which the calcium level in the blood becomes too high. Too much calcium in the blood can weaken bones and create kidney stones. It also can affect the heart and brain.Most often, hypercalcemia happens after one or more of the parathyroid glands make too much hormone. These four tiny glands are in the neck, near the thyroid gland. Other causes of hypercalcemia include cancer, certain other medical conditions and some medicines. Taking too much of calcium and vitamin D supplements also can cause hypercalcemia.Some people have no symptoms of this condition. Others have symptoms that range from mild to serious. Treatment depends on the cause.[MUSIC PLAYING]Why Choose Mayo ClinicParathyroid treatmentTravis J. McKenzie, M.D., Endocrine and Metabolic Surgery: Here at the Mayo Clinic in Endocrine and Metabolic Surgery, we treat the full spectrum of parathyroid problems and that ranges from the simplest primary hyperparathyroidism to the most complex cases.Melanie L. Lyden, M.D., Endocrine and Metabolic Surgery: What they are are four little glands that regulate the calcium. And most often, it's just one of them that develops a tumor of it.Dr. McKenzie: We utilize multimodal imaging, meaning various types of imaging to identify where the abnormal parathyroid is located. And that can include various imaging techniques such as ultrasound, parathyroid sestamibi scan, which is a nuclear medicine imaging. We use four-dimensional CT scan, which is an advanced CT scan imaging of the neck and parathyroid glands. And finally, cutting-edge imaging such as choline PET scan.Trenton R. Foster, M.D., Endocrine and Metabolic Surgery: So PET choline is one of the newest imaging modalities that's out there. It requires a generation of a choline isotope onsite and so this is not widely available. It's really only available at a few centers across the country. And so with this type of scan, we can find parathyroid glands that are otherwise missed by traditional imaging techniques.Dr. McKenzie: Once that step is complete, then the patient can very confidently move towards the next step, which is treatment.Dr. Foster: Patients can come into the office feeling a variety of symptoms that are generally nonspecific but rather debilitating for them. In many of these cases, we're able to treat hyperparathyroidism and watch these symptoms literally go away.Dr. McKenzie: What we strive for is really to have a very efficient and effective itinerary for our patients and know they're going to be operated on by very high-volume, experienced parathyroid surgeons. They feel confident that they're going to come here and get the care they need and deserve.[MUSIC PLAYING]You might not have any symptoms if your hypercalcemia is mild. If it's more serious, your symptoms are related to the parts of your body affected by high blood calcium levels. Examples include:Call your healthcare professional if you think you have any symptoms of hypercalcemia. These can include extreme thirst, frequent urination and pain in the stomach area.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesCalcium helps build strong bones and teeth. It also helps muscles contract and nerves send signals. When the parathyroid glands work right, they release hormones that help maintain the right balance of calcium in the blood. Parathyroid hormones trigger:This delicate balance between too little calcium in the blood and hypercalcemia can be affected by various factors. Hypercalcemia can be caused by:Hypercalcemia can lead to medical conditions that include:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.[MUSIC PLAYING]Why Choose Mayo ClinicParathyroid treatmentTravis J. McKenzie, M.D., Endocrine and Metabolic Surgery:Melanie L. Lyden, M.D., Endocrine and Metabolic Surgery:Dr. McKenzie:Trenton R. Foster, M.D., Endocrine and Metabolic Surgery:Dr. McKenzie:Dr. Foster:Dr. McKenzie:[MUSIC PLAYING]Kidneys.Digestive system.Bones and muscles.Brain.Heart.Overactive parathyroid glands. This also is called hyperparathyroidism.Cancer.Other diseases.Genetic factors.Little or no movement.Serious dehydration.Some medicines.Supplements.Osteoporosis.Kidney stones.Kidney failure.Nervous system conditions.Irregular heart rhythm.Advertising & Sponsorship