Hypothermia is a condition that occurs when core body temperature drops below 95 degrees Fahrenheit (35 degrees Celsius). It is a medical emergency. In hypothermia (hi-poe-THUR-me-uh), the body loses heat faster than it can produce heat, causing a dangerously low body temperature. Regular body temperature is around 98.6 degrees Fahrenheit (37 degrees Celsius).When body temperature drops, the heart, nervous system and other organs can't work as well as they usually do. Left untreated, hypothermia can cause the heart and respiratory system to fail and eventually can lead to death.Common causes of hypothermia include exposure to cold weather or immersion in cold water. Treatment for hypothermia includes methods to warm the body back to a regular temperature.When the temperature starts to drop, the body can start to shiver. Shivering is the body's attempt to warm itself. It is an automatic defense against cold temperature.Symptoms of hypothermia include:People with hypothermia usually aren't aware of their condition. The symptoms often begin gradually. Also, the confused thinking associated with hypothermia prevents self-awareness. The confused thinking also can lead to risk-taking behavior.Call 911 or your local emergency number if you suspect someone has hypothermia.While waiting for emergency help to arrive, gently move the person inside if possible. Jarring movements can trigger dangerous irregular heartbeats. Carefully remove any wet clothing and replace it with warm, dry coats or blankets.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesHypothermia occurs when the body loses heat faster than it produces it. The most common causes of hypothermia are exposure to cold-weather conditions or cold water. But prolonged exposure to any environment colder than the body can lead to hypothermia if a person isn't dressed properly or can't control the conditions.Specific conditions leading to hypothermia include:The mechanisms of heat loss from the body include:Risk factors for hypothermia include:Alcohol and drug use. Alcohol may make the body feel warm inside, but it causes blood vessels to expand. As a result, the surface of the skin loses heat more rapidly. Alcohol also reduces the body's natural shivering response.In addition, the use of alcohol or recreational drugs can affect judgment about the need to get inside or wear warm clothes in cold-weather conditions. A person who is intoxicated and passes out in cold weather is likely to develop hypothermia.Ian Roth: As winter drags on and temperatures drop way down, your risk of cold-related injury like frostbite can go way up.Sanj Kakar, M.D., Orthopedic Surgery, Mayo Clinic: Literally think of it as freezing of the tissues.Ian Roth: Dr. Sanj Kakar, a Mayo Clinic Orthopedic hand and wrist surgeon, says frostbite is more common than many people think.Dr. Kakar: We tend to see frostbite, for example, when the temperature is 5 degrees Fahrenheit with minimal windchill.Ian Roth: If the windchill drops below negative 15 degrees Fahrenheit, not unheard of in the northern half of the U.S., frostbite can set in within half an hour. The most vulnerable areas of frostbite are your nose, ears, fingers and toes.Dr. Kakar: Initially [with] the milder forms, you can get some pain and some numbness of the tips, but the skin can change its color. It can be red. It can be white. Or it can be blue. And you can get these blisters on your hands. And it can be a very serious injury.Ian Roth: The worst cases, the tissue can die, and you may need surgery to remove it.So who's most at risk?Dr. Kakar: [Those most at risk are] certain patients with diabetes, patients who have previous history of frostbite are prone to it, the elderly or your very young children, and also, for example, if you're dehydrated.Ian Roth: For the Mayo Clinic News Network, I'm Ian Roth.People who develop hypothermia because of exposure to cold weather or cold water are also vulnerable to other cold-related injuries, including:To stay warm in cold weather, remember the acronym COLD — cover, overexertion, layers, dry:To help prevent hypothermia when children are outside in the winter:When traveling during bad weather, be sure someone knows where you're headed and at what time you're expected to arrive. That way, if you get into trouble on your way, emergency responders will know where to look for your car.It's also a good idea to keep emergency supplies in the car in case you get stranded. Supplies may include several blankets, matches, candles, a clean can where you can melt snow into drinking water, a first-aid kit, dry or canned food, a can opener, tow rope, booster cables, a compass, and a bag of sand or kitty litter to spread for traction if the car gets stuck in the snow. If possible, travel with a cellphone.If you're stranded, put everything you need in the car with you, huddle together and stay covered. Run the car for 10 minutes each hour to warm it up. Make sure a window is slightly open and the exhaust pipe isn't covered with snow while the engine is running.To avoid alcohol-related risks of hypothermia, don't drink alcohol:Water doesn't have to be extremely cold to cause hypothermia. Any water that's colder than usual body temperature causes heat loss. The following tips may increase your survival time in cold water if you accidentally fall in:Community outreach programs and social support services can be of great help for people most at risk of hypothermia. This includes infants, older adults, people who have mental or physical health conditions, and people who are homeless. If you are at risk or know someone at risk, contact your local public health office for available services, such as the following:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Call 911 or your local emergency numberRadiated heat.Direct contact.Wind.Exhaustion.Older age.Very young age.Mental conditions.Alcohol and drug use.Certain medical conditions.Medicines.Ian Roth:Sanj Kakar, M.D., Orthopedic Surgery, Mayo Clinic:Ian Roth:Dr. Kakar:Ian Roth:Dr. Kakar:Ian Roth:Dr. Kakar:Ian Roth:Cover.Overexertion.Layers.Dry.Wear a life jacket.Get out of the water if possible.Don't attempt to swim unless you're close to safety.Position the body to minimize heat loss.Huddle with others.Don't remove clothing.Advertising & Sponsorship