Hypoparathyroidism is an uncommon condition in which the body produces abnormally low levels of parathyroid hormone (PTH). parathyroid hormone (PTH) is key to regulating and maintaining a balance of two minerals in the body — calcium and phosphorus.The low production of PTH in hypoparathyroidism leads to abnormally low calcium levels in the blood and an increase of phosphorus in the blood. The parathyroid glands lie behind the thyroid. They produce parathyroid hormone, which plays a role in regulating the body's blood level of calcium and phosphorus. Supplements to bring calcium and phosphorus levels into a normal range treat the condition. Depending on the cause of hypoparathyroidism, you'll likely need to take supplements for life. Sometimes parathyroid hormone replacement is needed if supplements alone are not enough to bring levels into a normal range.Signs and symptoms of hypoparathyroidism are usually related to low calcium levels in the blood. Signs and symptoms can include:Other signs and symptoms associated with hypoparathyroidism can include:If you have signs or symptoms associated with hypoparathyroidism, see your health care provider for an evaluation. Contact your health care provider immediately if you have a seizure or have difficulty breathing. These can both be complications of hypoparathyroidism.Hypoparathyroidism occurs when the parathyroid glands don't produce enough parathyroid hormone. There are four small parathyroid glands in the neck behind the thyroid gland.Parathyroid hormone controls the levels of calcium and phosphorus, so too little parathyroid hormone causes abnormal levels of:Causes of hypoparathyroidism can include:Factors that can increase the risk of developing hypoparathyroidism include:Hypoparathyroidism can result in both reversible and irreversible complications.Complications due to low calcium levels that may improve with treatment include:Accurate diagnosis and treatment might prevent these complications or keep them from getting worse. But once they occur, taking calcium and vitamin D usually doesn't reverse the damage. Irreversible complications include:There are no specific actions to prevent hypoparathyroidism. However, if you're scheduled to have thyroid or neck surgery, talk to your surgeon about the risk of damage to your parathyroid glands during the procedure. Your health care provider may choose to test your calcium, parathyroid hormone and vitamin D levels and have you begin taking supplements if needed before surgery.Parathyroid autotransplantation may be an option to reduce the chances of postoperative hypoparathyroidism. The surgeon works to preserve parathyroid tissue in the neck during the procedure. However, occasionally the surgeon may need to move parathyroid tissue to another area of the body, such as the arm or the chest muscle. Transplanted parathyroid tissue does not always function.If you've had surgery or radiation involving your thyroid or neck, watch for signs and symptoms that could indicate hypoparathyroidism, such as a tingling or burning sensation in your fingers, toes or lips, or muscle twitching or cramping. If they occur, your health care provider might recommend prompt treatment with calcium and vitamin D to minimize the effects of the disorder.May 11, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.