IgA nephropathy (nuh-FROP-uh-thee), also known as Berger disease, is a kidney disease. It happens when a germ-fighting protein called immunoglobulin A (IgA) builds up in the kidneys. This causes a type of swelling called inflammation that, over time, can make it harder for the kidneys to filter waste from the blood.IgA nephropathy often becomes worse slowly over years. But the course of the disease varies from person to person. Some people leak blood into their urine without having other problems. Others might have complications such as losing kidney function and spilling protein into the urine. Still others develop kidney failure, which means the kidneys stop working well enough to filter the body's waste on their own.There's no cure for IgA nephropathy, but medicines can slow how quickly it becomes worse. Some people need treatment to lower inflammation, reduce the spilling of protein into the urine and prevent the kidneys from failing. Such treatments may help the disease become not active, a state called remission. Keeping blood pressure under control and lowering cholesterol also slow the disease.IgA nephropathy often doesn't cause symptoms early on. You might not notice any health effects for 10 years or more. Sometimes, routine medical tests find signs of the disease, such as protein and red blood cells in the urine that are seen under a microscope.When IgA nephropathy causes symptoms, they might include:If the disease leads to kidney failure, symptoms may include:Kidney failure is life-threatening without treatment. But dialysis or a kidney transplant can help people live for many more years.See your doctor if you think you have symptoms of IgA nephropathy. It's key to get a checkup if you notice blood in your urine. Various conditions can cause this symptom. But if it keeps happening or it doesn't go away, it might be a sign of a serious health problem. Also see your doctor if you notice sudden swelling in your hands or feet.The kidneys remove waste and extra fluid from the blood through filtering units called nephrons. Each nephron contains a filter, called a glomerulus. Each filter has tiny blood vessels called capillaries. When blood flows into a glomerulus, tiny bits, called molecules, of water, minerals and nutrients, and wastes pass through the capillary walls. Large molecules, such as proteins and red blood cells, do not. The part that's filtered then passes into another part of the nephron called the tubule. The water, nutrients and minerals the body needs are sent back to the bloodstream. The extra water and waste become urine that flows to the bladder.The kidneys are two bean-shaped, fist-sized organs located at the small of the back, one on each side of the spine. Each kidney contains tiny blood vessels called glomeruli. These vessels filter waste, extra water and other substances from the blood. Then the filtered blood goes back into the bloodstream. The waste products pass into the bladder and out of the body in urine.Immunoglobulin A (IgA) is a type of protein called an antibody. The immune system makes IgA to help attack germs and fight infections. But with IgA nephropathy, this protein collects in the glomeruli. This causes inflammation and affects their filtering ability over time.Researchers don't know exactly what causes IgA to build up in the kidneys. But the following things might be linked with it:The exact cause of IgA nephropathy is unknown. But these factors might raise the risk of getting it:The course of IgA nephropathy varies from person to person. Some people have the disease for years with few or no problems. Many don't get diagnosed. Other people develop one or more of the following complications:You can't prevent IgA nephropathy. Talk with your doctor if you have a family history of the disease. Ask what you can do to keep your kidneys healthy. For example, it helps to lower high blood pressure and keep cholesterol at healthy levels.IgA nephropathy (Berger disease) care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Transplants support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.1606 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 15 Replies Fri, Jun 21, 2024 100 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Genes.Liver diseases.Celiac disease.Infections.Sex.Ethnicity.Age.Family history.High blood pressure.High cholesterol.Acute kidney failure.Chronic kidney disease.Nephrotic syndrome.Advertising & Sponsorship