Immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) is an illness that can lead to bruising and bleeding. Low levels of the cells that help blood clot, also known as platelets, most often cause the bleeding.Once known as idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, ITP can cause purple bruises. It also can cause tiny reddish-purple dots on the skin that look like a rash.Children can get ITP after a virus. They most often get better without treatment. In adults, the illness often lasts months or years.People with ITP who aren't bleeding and whose platelet count isn't too low might not need treatment. For worse symptoms, treatment might include medicines to raise platelet count or surgery to remove the spleen.Bleeding into the skin looks like tiny reddish-purple spots, also known as petechiae. Petechiae might look like a rash. Here they appear on a leg (A) and on the stomach area (B).Immune thrombocytopenia might not have symptoms. When symptoms occur, they might include:Make an appointment with your health care provider if you or your child has symptoms that worry you. Bleeding that won't stop is a medical emergency. Seek help right away if you or your child has bleeding that the usual first aid efforts can't control. These include applying pressure to the area.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesImmune thrombocytopenia usually happens when the immune system makes a mistake. It attacks and destroys the cells that help blood clot, also known as platelets.In adults, an infection with HIV, hepatitis or the bacteria that causes stomach ulcers, known as H. pylori, can cause ITP. In most children with ITP, the disorder follows a virus, such as the mumps or the flu.ITP is more common among young women. The risk appears to be higher in people who also have other diseases in which the immune system attacks healthy tissues, such as rheumatoid arthritis or lupus. Rarely, immune thrombocytopenia causes bleeding into the brain. This can be fatal.Someone who's pregnant with a low platelet count or who's bleeding has a greater risk of heavy bleeding during delivery. A health care provider might suggest treatment to keep the platelet count even.ITP doesn't usually affect the fetus. However, the baby's platelet count should be tested soon after birth.Immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Blood Cancers & Disorders support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.157 Replies Tue, Jun 25, 2024 61 Replies Tue, Jun 25, 2024 53 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship