Wisdom teeth are the last of your teeth to appear (erupt) in the mouth. Sometimes a wisdom tooth becomes stuck below the surface of your gums and grows at an odd angle, possibly causing problems. This is called an impacted wisdom tooth.Wisdom teeth, the third molars at the back of the mouth, are the last adult teeth to come in. Most people have four wisdom teeth — two on the top and two on the bottom. When wisdom teeth become impacted, they don't have enough room to emerge or develop in the usual way.Impacted wisdom teeth can cause pain, damage other teeth and lead to other dental problems. Sometimes they don't cause any problems. But because wisdom teeth are hard to clean, they may be more prone to tooth decay and gum disease than other teeth.Impacted wisdom teeth that cause pain or other dental problems usually are taken out. Some dentists and oral surgeons also recommend taking out impacted wisdom teeth that don't cause symptoms to prevent future problems.Impacted wisdom teeth don't always cause symptoms. But when an impacted wisdom tooth becomes infected, damages other teeth or causes other dental problems, you may have some of these symptoms:See your dentist if you have symptoms in the area behind your last molar that may be related to an impacted wisdom tooth.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesWisdom teeth become impacted because they don't have enough room to come in or develop in the usual way.Wisdom teeth usually emerge sometime between the ages of 17 and 26. Some people have wisdom teeth that emerge behind the second molars without any problems and line up with the other teeth. But in many cases, the mouth is too crowded for proper development of third molars. These crowded third molars become impacted.An impacted wisdom tooth may partially emerge so that some of the crown is visible. This is called a partially impacted wisdom tooth. If the tooth never breaks through the gums, it's called a fully impacted wisdom tooth.Whether partially or fully impacted, the tooth may:Risk factors that can lead to impacted wisdom teeth include lack of space or a blockage that keeps the teeth from emerging properly.Impacted wisdom teeth can cause several problems in the mouth, including:You can't keep an impaction from occurring. But keeping regular six-month dental appointments for cleaning and checkups allows your dentist to watch the growth and emergence of your wisdom teeth. Regularly updated dental X-rays may show impacted wisdom teeth before any symptoms start.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Damage to other teeth.Cysts.Decay.Gum disease.Advertising & Sponsorship