Impetigo (im-puh-TIE-go) is a common and highly contagious skin infection that mainly affects infants and young children. It usually appears as reddish sores on the face, especially around the nose and mouth and on the hands and feet. Over about a week, the sores burst and develop honey-colored crusts. Illustration of impetigo on different skin colors. Sores mainly occur around the nose and mouth in infants and children. Treatment with antibiotics can limit the spread of impetigo to others. Keep children home from school or day care until they're no longer contagious — usually 24 hours after beginning antibiotic treatment.The main symptom of impetigo is reddish sores, often around the nose and mouth. The sores quickly rupture, ooze for a few days and then form a honey-colored crust. Sores can spread to other areas of the body through touch, clothing and towels. Itching and soreness are generally mild.A less common form of the condition called bullous impetigo causes larger blisters on the trunk of infants and young children. Ecthyma is a serious form of impetigo that causes painful fluid- or pus-filled sores. Bullous impetigo causes fluid-filled blisters often on the trunk, arms and legs of infants and children younger than 2 years. A more serious form of impetigo, called ecthyma, penetrates deeper into the skin causing painful fluid- or pus-filled sores that turn into deep ulcers. If you suspect that you or your child has impetigo, consult your family doctor, your child's pediatrician or a dermatologist.Impetigo is caused by bacteria, usually staphylococci organisms.You might be exposed to the bacteria that cause impetigo when you come into contact with the sores of someone who's infected or with items they've touched — such as clothing, bed linen, towels and even toys.Factors that increase the risk of impetigo include:Impetigo typically isn't dangerous. And the sores in mild forms of the infection generally heal without scarring.Rarely, complications of impetigo include:Keeping skin clean is the best way to keep it healthy. It's important to wash cuts, scrapes, insect bites and other wounds right away.To help prevent impetigo from spreading to others:Apr 19, 2023CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.