If you and your partner are struggling to have a baby, you're not alone. Millions of people around the world face the same challenge. Infertility is the medical term for when you can't get pregnant despite having frequent, unprotected sex for at least a year for most couples. Infertility may happen because of a health issue with either you or your partner, or a mix of factors that prevent pregnancy. But many safe and effective treatments can boost your chances of getting pregnant.The main symptom of infertility is not getting pregnant. There may be no other clear symptoms. Some women with infertility may have irregular menstrual periods or no periods. And some men may have some symptoms of hormonal problems, such as changes in hair growth or sexual function.Many couples eventually will conceive — with or without treatment. You likely don't need to see a member of your healthcare team about infertility unless you've been trying to get pregnant for at least one year. But women should talk with a healthcare professional sooner if they:Men should talk to a healthcare professional if they have:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Get the latest information from our Mayo Clinic experts on women’s health topics, serious and complex conditions, wellness and more. Click to view a preview and subscribe below.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesDuring fertilization, the sperm and egg unite in one of the fallopian tubes to form a zygote. Then the zygote travels down the fallopian tube, where it becomes a morula. Once it reaches the uterus, the morula becomes a blastocyst. The blastocyst then burrows into the uterine wall — a process called implantation.The male reproductive system makes, stores and moves sperm. The testicles produce sperm. Fluid from the seminal vesicles and prostate gland combines with sperm to make semen. The penis ejaculates semen during sexual intercourse.The ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix and vagina (vaginal canal) make up the female reproductive system.All of the steps during ovulation and fertilization need to happen correctly in order to get pregnant. Ovulation is the release of an egg from an ovary. Fertilization is when the egg and sperm unite to form an embryo, which becomes an unborn baby during pregnancy. Sometimes, the issues that cause infertility in couples are present at birth. Other times, they develop later in life.Infertility causes can affect one or both partners. In some cases, no cause can be found.These can include:These can include:Many of the risk factors for both male and female infertility are the same. They include:Some types of infertility can't be prevented. But the following tips may boost your chances of pregnancy.Have sex often soon after menstrual bleeding stops. One of the ovaries usually releases an egg in the middle of the cycle — halfway between menstrual periods — for most people with menstrual cycles about 28 days apart. It's ideal to have sex every day starting 5 to 7 days before the release of the egg. Continue until two days after ovulation.Most types of infertility aren't preventable in men, but these tips may help:For women, the following tips may boost the chances of getting pregnant:Infertility care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Conditions that can affect how much sperm is made or sperm quality.Problems with sperm reaching the female reproductive tract.Certain factors in the environment.Damage related to cancer and its treatment.Ovulation disorders.Conditions of the uterus.Fallopian tube damage or blockage.Endometriosis.Primary ovarian insufficiency.Pelvic adhesions.Cancer and its treatment.Age.Tobacco use.Marijuana use.Alcohol use.Being overweight.Being underweight.Exercise issues.Stay away from drugs and tobacco, and don't drink a lot of alcohol.Don't take frequent baths in hot water.Stay away from pollutants and toxins.Limit medicines that may impact fertility if possible.Work out.Quit smoking.Stay away from alcohol and street drugs.Limit caffeine.Exercise safely.Get to a healthy weight.Advertising & Sponsorship