Flu, also called influenza, is an infection of the nose, throat and lungs, which are part of the respiratory system. The flu is caused by a virus. Influenza is commonly called the flu, but it's different from the stomach "flu" viruses that cause diarrhea and vomiting.Most people with the flu get better on their own.But sometimes, influenza and its complications can be deadly. Some groups of people are at a higher than average risk of having flu complications, including:And in the United States, some groups have a higher risk of needing treatment in the hospital for flu. Those groups include people who are American Indian or Alaska Native, Black or Latino.Other groups at high risk for flu complications include people with:And people with certain medical conditions have a higher risk of flu complications, such as:Although the annual influenza vaccine isn't 100% effective, it lowers the chances of having severe complications from the flu. This is especially true for people who are at high risk for flu complications.At first, the flu may seem like a cold with a runny nose, sneezing and sore throat. Colds usually start slowly. But the flu tends to come on quickly. And while a cold can be miserable, you usually feel much worse with the flu.Common symptoms of the flu often — but not always — include a fever as well as aching muscles, chills and sweats.Other symptoms include:Vomiting and diarrhea also are flu symptoms. But they are more common in children than in adults.Most people who get the flu can treat themselves at home and often don't need to see a healthcare professional.If you have flu symptoms and are at risk of complications, see your healthcare professional right away. Taking antiviral medicine to treat the flu may shorten the length of your illness and help prevent more-serious problems.If you have emergency symptoms of the flu, get medical care right away. For adults, emergency symptoms can include:Emergency symptoms in children include all the symptoms seen in adults, as well as:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesInfluenza is caused by viruses. These viruses travel through the air in droplets when someone with the infection coughs, sneezes or talks. You can inhale the droplets directly. Or you can pick up the germs from touching an object, such as a computer keyboard, and then touching your eyes, nose or mouth.People with the virus are likely contagious from about a day before symptoms appear until about 5 to 7 days after they start. Children and people with weakened immune systems may be contagious for a slightly longer time.Influenza viruses are constantly changing, with new strains appearing often. If you've had influenza in the past, your body has already made antibodies to fight that specific strain of the virus.If future influenza viruses are like those you've come across before, either by having the disease or by getting vaccinated, those antibodies may prevent infection or lessen its severity.But antibody levels may decline over time. And antibodies against past influenza viruses may not protect you from new influenza strains. New strains can be very different from what you had before.Factors that may raise your risk of getting the flu or its complications include:If you're young and healthy, the flu usually isn't serious. Although you may feel awful while you have it, the flu usually goes away in a week or two with no lasting effects. But children and adults at high risk may develop complications that may include:Pneumonia is one of the most serious complications. For older adults and people with chronic illnesses, pneumonia can be deadly.Mayo Clinic offers flu shots in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota.The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends annual flu vaccination for everyone age 6 months or older. The flu vaccine can lower your risk of getting the flu. The flu vaccine lowers your risk of having serious illness from the flu and needing to stay in the hospital due to flu. The flu vaccine also lowers your risk of dying of flu.Flu vaccination is especially important because the flu and coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) cause similar symptoms. Both COVID-19 and the flu may be spreading at the same time. Vaccination is the best way to protect against both.And if a COVID-19 vaccine or booster and a flu vaccination are due at the same time, you can often get vaccinated for both in one visit.This year's seasonal flu vaccines each provide protection against the four influenza viruses expected to be the most common during this flu season. This year, the vaccine will be available as an injection and as a nasal spray. There also will be high-dose flu vaccines offered for adults age 65 and older.The nasal spray is approved for people between ages 2 and 49 years old. It isn't recommended for some groups, such as:If you have an egg allergy, you can still get a flu vaccine.The influenza vaccine isn't 100% effective, so it's also important to take several measures to lower the spread of infection, including:Also avoid anyone who is sick. And if you're sick, stay home for at least 24 hours after your fever is gone so that you lessen your chance of infecting others.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Age.Living or working conditions.Weakened immune system.Chronic illnesses.Race or ethnicity.Aspirin use under age 20.Pregnancy.Obesity.Wash your hands.Avoid touching your face.Cover your coughs and sneezes.Clean surfaces.Avoid crowds.Advertising & Sponsorship