Ingrown hair occurs when a hair that's been removed starts to grow back and curves into the skin. Shaving, tweezing or waxing can cause this to happen. An ingrown hair can cause tiny, swollen bumps on the skin that may hurt. The condition most often affects Black people with curly hair who shave.Most instances of ingrown hair get better without treatment. You can avoid this condition by not removing hair or not shaving very close to the skin. If that's not an option, you might try other hair removal methods that lessen the risk of developing ingrown hair.Signs and symptoms of ingrown hair include:An occasional ingrown hair isn't cause for alarm. Seek medical care if your condition doesn't clear up or if it causes problems regularly.Ingrown hair occurs when a hair that's been removed starts to grow back and curves into the skin. This usually happens after shaving, tweezing or waxing.Hair structure and direction of growth play a role in ingrown hair. A curved hair follicle, which produces tightly curled hair, is believed to encourage the hair to reenter the skin once the hair is cut and starts to grow back. Shaving creates a sharp edge on hair, making it easier to pierce the skin.Ingrown hair might also be caused by:When a hair penetrates your skin, your skin reacts as it would to a foreign body — it becomes irritated.The main risk factor for ingrown hair is having tightly curled hair.Razor bumps affect people with curly beards. The condition is also called pseudofolliculitis barbae. It develops when shaved hairs curve back into the skin, leading to inflammation.Ingrown hair that doesn't clear up can lead to:To help prevent ingrown hair, avoid shaving, tweezing and waxing. If that's not an option, use these tips to make ingrown hair less likely:The following hair removal methods also may help prevent ingrown hair:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Electric razor or clippers.Chemical hair remover (depilatory).Advertising & Sponsorship