Inherited metabolic disorders are medical conditions caused by changes in specific genes that affect metabolism. Different gene changes cause different types of inherited metabolic disorders. These gene changes are most commonly passed down from both parents. But sometimes the gene change comes only from one parent, most often from the mother. These disorders also are called inborn errors of metabolism.Metabolism is the complex set of chemical reactions that your body uses to maintain life. These include:When these processes don't work properly, a metabolic disorder occurs. It may be due to an enzyme that's too low or missing or to another problem. Inherited metabolic disorders fall into different groups. They're grouped by the substance affected and whether it builds up too much because it can't be broken down or it's too low or missing.There are hundreds of inherited metabolic disorders caused by different genes. Symptoms depend on the type of disorder and how severe it is.Examples of inherited metabolic disorders include:If you have concerns about your child's growth and development or your own health, talk to your doctor or other healthcare professional.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care.If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.Please, try again in a couple of minutesInherited metabolic disorders are caused by changes in specific genes that affect metabolism. Different gene changes cause different types of inherited metabolic disorders. These gene changes are most commonly passed down from both parents. But sometimes the gene change comes only from one parent, most often from the mother. There are hundreds of inherited metabolic disorders caused by different genes.The risk of an inherited metabolic disorder is higher if one or both parents have the gene change that can cause the condition. In some cases, future parents may decide to have carrier testing before pregnancy. This test can identify some gene changes in parents that may raise the risk that future children will have certain types of inherited metabolic disorders.Inherited metabolic disorders care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Making energy.Making or getting rid of substances.Advertising & Sponsorship