Intermittent explosive disorder involves repeated, sudden bouts of impulsive, aggressive, violent behavior or angry verbal outbursts. The reactions are too extreme for the situation. Road rage, domestic abuse, throwing or breaking objects, or other temper tantrums may be symptoms of intermittent explosive disorder.These explosive outbursts, which occur off and on, cause major distress. They can harm relationships and cause problems at work or school. They also can result in problems with the law.Intermittent explosive disorder is a long-term condition that can go on for years. But the severity of outbursts may lessen with age. Treatment involves talk therapy and medicine to help you control your aggressive impulses.Impulsive attacks and angry outbursts occur suddenly, with little or no warning. They usually last less than 30 minutes. These bouts may occur often or be separated by weeks or months. Verbal outbursts or less severe physical attacks may still occur in between these times. You may be irritable, impulsive, aggressive or angry most of the time.Before an aggressive bout, you may feel:The explosive verbal and behavioral outbursts are much too intense for the situation, with no thought about what might happen as a result. The outbursts can include:You may feel a sense of relief and tiredness after the outburst. Later, you may feel guilty, sorry for your actions or embarrassed.If you recognize your own behavior in the description of intermittent explosive disorder, talk with your doctor or other health care professional about treatment options. You also can ask for a referral to a mental health professional.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesIntermittent explosive disorder can begin in childhood — after the age of 6 years — or during the teenage years. It's more common in younger adults than in older adults. The exact cause of the disorder is not known. It may be caused by the living environment and learned behaviors, genetics, or differences in the brain.These factors raise your risk of developing intermittent explosive disorder:People with intermittent explosive disorder have a higher risk of:If you have intermittent explosive disorder, prevention is likely beyond your control unless you get treatment from a mental health professional.After you start treatment, follow the plan and practice the skills you learn. If medicine is prescribed, be sure to take it. Do not use alcohol or drugs.When possible, leave or avoid situations that upset you. Also, scheduling personal time to allow you to lower stress may help you to better handle an upcoming stressful or frustrating situation.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Living environment.Genetics.Differences in how the brain works.History of physical abuse.History of other mental health conditions.Problems with relationships.Trouble at work, home or school.Problems with mood.Problems with alcohol and drug use.Physical health problems.Self-harm.Advertising & Sponsorship