The small intestine and colon are components of your digestive tract, which processes the foods you eat. The intestines extract nutrients from the foods. What isn't absorbed by the intestines continues along the digestive tract and is expelled as stool during a bowel movement. Diarrhea can be present due to irregularities in the small intestine or the large intestine.Intestinal ischemia (is-KEE-me-uh) describes a variety of conditions that occur when blood flow to your intestines decreases. Ischemia can be due to a fully or partially blocked blood vessel, usually an artery, or low blood pressure leading to an overall reduced blood flow. Intestinal ischemia can affect your small intestine, your large intestine (colon) or both.The decreased blood flow doesn't provide enough oxygen for the cells in your digestive system. Intestinal ischemia is a serious condition that can cause pain and make it difficult for your intestines to work properly. In severe cases, loss of blood flow to the intestines can damage intestinal tissue and possibly lead to death.Treatments are available for intestinal ischemia. To improve the chances of recovery, it's crucial to recognize the early symptoms and get medical help right away.Signs and symptoms of intestinal ischemia can develop suddenly (acute) or gradually (chronic). Signs and symptoms may be different from one person to the next, but there are some generally recognized patterns that suggest intestinal ischemia.Signs and symptoms of acute intestinal ischemia typically include:Signs and symptoms of chronic intestinal ischemia can include:Seek immediate medical care if you have sudden, severe abdominal pain. Pain that makes you so uncomfortable that you can't sit still or find a comfortable position is a medical emergency.If you have other signs or symptoms that worry you, make an appointment with your health care provider.Intestinal ischemia occurs when the blood flow through the major blood vessels that supply blood to (arteries) and from (veins) your intestines slows or stops. The condition has many possible causes. These can include:Intestinal ischemia is often divided into categories. Colon ischemia (ischemic colitis) affects the large intestine. Types of ischemia that affect the small intestine include acute mesenteric ischemia, chronic mesenteric ischemia and ischemia due to mesenteric venous thrombosis.This type of intestinal ischemia, which is the most common, occurs when blood flow to part of the colon is slowed or blocked. The cause of reduced blood flow to the colon isn't always clear, but a number of conditions can put you at risk of colon ischemia:Mesenteric ischemia occurs when narrowed or blocked arteries restrict blood flow to your small intestine. Decreased blood flow can permanently damage the small intestine.Acute mesenteric ischemia is the result of a sudden loss of blood flow to the small intestine. It may be due to:Chronic mesenteric ischemia results from the buildup of fatty deposits on an artery wall (atherosclerosis). The disease process is generally gradual. It's also known as intestinal angina because it results in decreased blood flow to the intestines after eating. You may not require treatment until at least two of the three major arteries supplying your intestines become severely narrowed or completely blocked.A possibly dangerous complication of chronic mesenteric ischemia is developing a blood clot within a narrowed artery. This can cause blood flow to be suddenly blocked, resulting in acute mesenteric ischemia.This ischemia occurs when blood can't leave your small intestines. A blood clot can develop in a vein draining blood from your intestines. Veins carry blood that has had the oxygen removed back to the heart. When the vein is blocked, blood backs up in the intestines, causing swelling and bleeding. This may result from:Factors that may increase your risk of intestinal ischemia include:Complications of intestinal ischemia can include:Other health conditions, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), can worsen the severity of intestinal ischemia. Emphysema, a type of COPD, and other smoking-related lung diseases increase this risk.In some cases, intestinal ischemia can result in death.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.A blood clot (embolus) that comes loose from your heartA blockage that develops within one of the main intestinal arteriesImpaired blood flow resulting from low blood pressureBuildup of fatty deposits in your arteries (atherosclerosis).Age.Smoking.Heart and blood vessel problems.Medications.Blood-clotting problems.Other health conditions.Recreational drug use.Death of intestinal tissue.A hole through the wall of the intestines (perforation).Scarring or narrowing of your intestine.Advertising & Sponsorship