The uvea consists of structures of the eye beneath the white of the eye (sclera). It has three parts: (1) the iris, which is the colored part of the eye; (2) the ciliary body, which is the structure in the eye that secretes the transparent liquid within the front of the eye; and (3) the choroid, which is the layer of blood vessels between the sclera and the retina.Iritis (i-RYE-tis) is swelling and irritation (inflammation) in the colored ring around your eye's pupil (iris). Another name for iritis is anterior uveitis.The uvea is the middle layer of the eye between the retina and the white part of the eye. The iris is located in the front portion (anterior) of the uvea.Iritis is the most common type of uveitis. Uveitis is inflammation of part of or all of the uvea. The cause is often unknown. It can result from an underlying condition or genetic factor.If untreated, iritis could lead to glaucoma or vision loss. See your doctor as soon as possible if you have symptoms of iritis.Iritis can occur in one or both eyes. It usually develops suddenly, and can last up to three months.Signs and symptoms of iritis include:Iritis that develops suddenly, over hours or days, is known as acute iritis. Symptoms that develop gradually or last longer than three months indicate chronic iritis.See an eye specialist (ophthalmologist) as soon as possible if you have symptoms of iritis. Prompt treatment helps prevent serious complications. If you have eye pain and vision problems with other signs and symptoms, you might need urgent medical care.Often, the cause of iritis can't be determined. In some cases, iritis can be linked to eye trauma, genetic factors or certain diseases. Causes of iritis include:Infections. Viral infections on your face, such as cold sores and shingles caused by herpes viruses, can cause iritis.Infectious diseases from other viruses and bacteria can also be linked to uveitis. For instance, they may include toxoplasmosis, an infection most often caused by a parasite in uncooked food; histoplasmosis, a lung infection that occurs when you inhale spores of fungus; tuberculosis, which happens when bacteria enters the lungs; and syphilis, which is caused by the spread of bacteria through sexual contact.Your risk of developing iritis increases if you:If not treated properly, iritis could lead to:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Injury to the eye.Infections.Genetic predisposition.Behcet's disease.Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis.Sarcoidosis.Certain medications.Have a specific genetic alteration.Develop a sexually transmitted infection.Have a weakened immune system or an autoimmune disorder.Smoke tobacco.Cataracts.An irregular pupil.Glaucoma.Calcium deposits on the cornea.Swelling within the retina.Advertising & Sponsorship