Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a common disorder that affects the stomach and intestines, also called the gastrointestinal tract. Symptoms include cramping, abdominal pain, bloating, gas, and diarrhea or constipation, or both. IBS is a chronic condition that you'll need to manage long term.Only a small number of people with IBS have severe symptoms. Some people can control their symptoms by managing diet, lifestyle and stress. More-severe symptoms can be treated with medication and counseling.IBS doesn't cause changes in bowel tissue or increase your risk of colorectal cancer.Symptoms of IBS vary but are usually present for a long time. The most common include:Other symptoms that are often related include sensation of incomplete evacuation and increased gas or mucus in the stool.IBS is a functional disorder. Even though the digestive tract looks normal, it doesn't function as it should. Muscles in the intestines move food from the stomach to the rectum. Normally, they contract and relax in a gentle rhythm that moves the food along in a fairly predictable schedule. But with some people, the muscles in the intestines spasm. That means the contractions are longer and stronger than normal. Those spasms are painful. They also disrupt the movement of food through the intestines. If they slow it down, you become constipated. If they cause it to move through too quickly, you get diarrhea. It's not unusual for people to alternate between the two. Another cause of discomfort for people with IBS results from oversensitive nerve endings in the digestive tract. Small bubbles of gas that wouldn't bother most people might be quite painful for you. Your heightened sensitivity can also lead to swelling and bloating.See your health care provider if you have a persistent change in bowel habits or other symptoms of IBS. They may indicate a more serious condition, such as colon cancer. More-serious symptoms include:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care.If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe exact cause of IBS isn't known. Factors that appear to play a role include:Symptoms of IBS can be triggered by:Many people have occasional symptoms of IBS. But you're more likely to have the syndrome if you:Chronic constipation or diarrhea can cause hemorrhoids.In addition, IBS is associated with:Irritable bowel syndrome care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Muscle contractions in the intestine.Nervous system.Severe infection.Early life stress.Changes in gut microbes.Food.Stress.Are young.Are female.Have a family history of IBS.Have anxiety, depression or other mental health issues.Poor quality of life.Mood disorders.Advertising & Sponsorship