Itchy skin is an irritating sensation that makes you want to scratch. It's also called pruritus (proo-RIE-tus). Itchy skin is often caused by dry skin and is common in older adults, as skin tends to become drier with age.Depending on the cause of your itchiness, your skin may look no different than usual or it may be inflamed, rough or have bumps. Repeated scratching can cause raised thick areas of skin that might bleed or become infected.Many people find relief with self-care measures such as moisturizers, gentle cleansers and lukewarm baths. Long-term relief requires identifying and treating the cause of itchy skin. Common treatments are medicated creams, moist dressings and anti-itch medicines taken by mouth.Itchy skin can affect small areas, such as the scalp, an arm or a leg. Or it can cover the whole body. Itchy skin can occur without any other noticeable changes on the skin. Or it may come with:Sometimes itchiness lasts a long time and can be intense. As you rub or scratch the area, it gets itchier. And the more it itches, the more you scratch. Breaking this itch-scratch cycle can be difficult.See your health care provider or a skin disease specialist (dermatologist) if the itching:If the condition persists for three months despite treatment, see a dermatologist to be evaluated for skin disease. You may also need to see a doctor who specializes in internal medicine (internist) to check for other diseases.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesCauses of itchy skin include:Sometimes the cause of the itching can't be determined.Anyone can develop itchy skin. But you may be more likely to develop it if you:Itchy skin that is severe or lasts more than six weeks can affect the quality of your life. This type is called chronic pruritus. It might disturb your sleep or cause anxiety or depression. Prolonged itching and scratching can increase the intensity of the itch, possibly leading to skin injury, infection and scarring.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Skin conditions.Internal diseases.Nerve disorders.Psychiatric conditions.Irritation and allergic reactions.Advertising & Sponsorship