Jaw tumors and cysts are relatively rare growths or lesions that develop in the jawbone or the soft tissues in the mouth and face. Jaw tumors and cysts — sometimes referred to as odontogenic or nonodontogenic, depending on their origin — can vary greatly in size and severity. These growths are usually noncancerous (benign), but they can be aggressive and expand, displace or destroy the surrounding bone, tissue and teeth.Treatment options for jaw tumors and cysts vary, depending on the type of growth or lesion you have, the stage of growth, and your symptoms. Mouth, jaw and face (oral and maxillofacial) surgeons can treat your jaw tumor or cyst usually by surgery, or in some cases, by medical therapy or a combination of surgery and medical therapy.A tumor is an abnormal growth or mass of tissue. A cyst is a lesion that contains liquid or semisolid material. Examples of jaw tumors and cysts include:If you're concerned that you may have symptoms of a jaw tumor or cyst, talk with your primary care provider or dentist.Many times, jaw cysts and tumors do not have symptoms and are typically discovered on routine screening X-rays done for other reasons. If you are diagnosed with or suspected of having a jaw tumor or cyst, your primary care provider can refer you to a specialist for diagnosis and treatment.Odontogenic jaw tumors and cysts originate from cells and tissues that are involved in normal tooth development. Other tumors that affect the jaws can be nonodontogenic, meaning that they can develop from other tissues within the jaws that are not related to the teeth, such as bone or soft tissue cells. Generally, the cause of jaw tumors and cysts is not known; however, some are associated with gene changes (mutations) or genetic syndromes.People with nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome, also called Gorlin-Goltz syndrome, lack a gene that suppresses tumors. The genetic mutation that causes the syndrome is inherited. This syndrome results in the development of multiple odontogenic keratocysts within the jaws, multiple basal cell skin cancers and other characteristics.Jaw tumors and cysts care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Head & Neck Cancer support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.37 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 9 Replies Fri, Jun 07, 2024 69 Replies Fri, Jun 07, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Ameloblastoma.Central giant cell granuloma.Dentigerous cyst.Odontogenic keratocyst.Odontogenic myxoma.Odontoma.Other types of cysts and tumors.Advertising & Sponsorship