Jellyfish stings are fairly common problems for people swimming, wading or diving in oceans. The long tentacles trailing from the jellyfish can inject venom from thousands of microscopic barbed stingers.Most often jellyfish stings cause instant pain and inflamed marks on the skin. Some stings may cause more whole-body (systemic) illness. And in rare cases they're life-threatening.Most jellyfish stings get better over a few days or weeks with home treatment. Severe reactions likely need emergency medical care.Symptoms of jellyfish stings include:Severe jellyfish stings can affect multiple body systems. These reactions may appear rapidly or several hours after the stings. Symptoms of severe jellyfish stings include:The severity of a reaction depends on:Seek emergency treatment if you have severe symptoms.See your health care provider if your symptoms worsen or the wound shows symptoms of infection.Jellyfish stings are caused by brushing against a jellyfish tentacle. Tentacles have thousands of microscopic barbed stingers. Each stinger has a tiny bulb that holds venom and a coiled, sharp-tipped tube.When you brush against a tentacle, tiny triggers on its surface release the stingers. The tube pierces the skin and releases venom. It affects the area of contact and may enter the bloodstream.Jellyfish that have washed up on a beach may still release venomous stingers if touched.Many types of jellyfish are fairly harmless to humans. Others can cause severe pain and a full-body (systemic) reaction. These jellyfish cause more-serious problems in people:Conditions that increase the risk of jellyfish stings:Possible complications of a jellyfish sting include:The following tips can help you avoid jellyfish stings:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Box jellyfish.Portuguese man-of-war.Sea nettle.Lion's mane jellyfish.Wear a protective suit.Get information about conditions.Avoid water during jellyfish season.Advertising & Sponsorship