Illustration of jock itch on different skin colors. Jock itch is an itchy rash, often on the groin and inner thighs.Jock itch is a fungal skin infection that causes an itchy rash in warm, moist areas of the body. The rash often affects the groin and inner thighs and may be shaped like a ring. The condition is also called tinea cruris.Jock itch gets its name because it's common in athletes. It's also common in people who sweat a lot. The condition can range from mild to serious. It usually clears up in 1 to 3 weeks with antifungal creams and self care.Symptoms of jock itch are:See your doctor if your rash is painful or you develop a fever. And seek medical care if the rash hasn't improved after a week of self-care with the type of antifungal product you can get without a prescription. Also seek medical care if the rash hasn't cleared up fully after three weeks of treatment.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesJock itch is caused by fungi that thrive in warm, moist areas of the body. Jock itch is often caused by the same organism that causes athlete's foot. The rash can spread from person to person with skin contact or from sharing contaminated towels or clothing. You can also spread an infection from the foot to groin by way of the hands or a towel.You're at greater risk of jock itch if you:Tips for reducing the risk of jock itch include:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Stay dry.Wear clean clothes.Find the correct fit.Don't share personal items.Treat or prevent athlete's foot.Advertising & Sponsorship