Kaposi sarcoma is a type of cancer that forms in the lining of blood vessels and lymph vessels. The cancer forms growths of cells, called lesions, on the skin. The lesions often form on the face, arms and legs. The lesions may look pink, red, purple or brown.Lesions also can appear on the genitals or in the mouth. In severe Kaposi sarcoma, lesions can be in the digestive tract and lungs.The cause of Kaposi sarcoma is infection with the virus human herpes virus 8, also called HHV-8. In healthy people, this infection usually causes no symptoms because the immune system keeps it under control. In someone with a weakened immune system, however, HHV-8 can lead to Kaposi sarcoma.There are four types of Kaposi sarcoma:A health care professional may recommend removing a small piece of a skin lesion for testing. This procedure is called a skin biopsy. The sample is sent to a lab for testing. Lab tests can look for signs of cancer.A skin biopsy can confirm Kaposi sarcoma.Other tests might be needed to look for Kaposi sarcoma in the lungs or the digestive tract.Test to find Kaposi sarcoma in the digestive tract might include:Tests to find Kaposi sarcoma in the lungs might include:There's no cure for Kaposi sarcoma. But there are many treatment options that can help control it. Some people may not need treatment right away. Instead, the condition might be monitored to make sure it's not getting worse. Treatment depends on:Thanks to better antiviral medicines to treat AIDS and ways to prevent it, Kaposi sarcoma has become less common and less severe in people with AIDS. Taking antiviral medicines can lower the amount of the virus that causes HIV/AIDS and make the immune system stronger. This might be the only treatment needed for Kaposi sarcoma.Some people with transplant-related Kaposi sarcoma may be able to stop taking the medicines that are controlling the immune system or switch to another medicine.These might include:Lesions treated in any of these ways are likely to return within a couple of years. When this happens, treatment often can be repeated.If the Kaposi sarcoma causes many skin lesions, other treatments might be needed, such as:Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Sarcoma support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.803 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 57 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 59 Replies Fri, Jun 21, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.AIDS-related or epidemic Kaposi sarcoma.Transplant-associated or iatrogenic Kaposi sarcoma.Classic Kaposi sarcoma.Endemic Kaposi sarcoma.Fecal occult blood test.Endoscopy.Colonoscopy.Chest X-ray.CT scan.Bronchoscopy.Radiation therapy.Chemotherapy.Advertising & Sponsorship