Keratosis pilaris causes small bumps to appear on the upper arms, legs or buttocks. They usually don't hurt or itch.Keratosis pilaris (ker-uh-TOE-sis pih-LAIR-is) is a harmless skin condition that causes dry, rough patches and tiny bumps, often on the upper arms, thighs, cheeks or buttocks. The bumps usually don't hurt or itch.Keratosis pilaris is often considered a common variant of skin. It can't be cured or prevented. But you can treat it with moisturizers and prescription creams to help improve how the skin looks. The condition usually disappears by age 30.Keratosis pilaris can occur at any age, but it's more common in young children. Symptoms include:Treatment for keratosis pilaris usually isn't needed. But if you're concerned about your or your child's skin, consult your health care provider or a specialist in skin conditions (dermatologist).There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesKeratosis pilaris develops when keratin forms a scaly plug that blocks the opening of the hair follicle. Usually plugs form in many hair follicles, causing patches of rough, bumpy skin.Keratosis pilaris is caused by the buildup of keratin — a hard protein that protects skin from harmful substances and infection. The keratin blocks the opening of hair follicles, causing patches of rough, bumpy skin.It's not clear why keratin builds up in people with keratosis pilaris. It might happen along with a genetic disease or skin conditions such as atopic dermatitis. Dry skin tends to make keratosis pilaris worse.Keratosis pilaris is very common. It tends to run in families.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship