Keratitis is an inflammation of the cornea — the clear, dome-shaped tissue on the front of your eye that covers the pupil and iris. Keratitis may or may not be associated with an infection. Noninfectious keratitis can be caused by a relatively minor injury, such as from wearing your contact lenses too long or getting a foreign body in the eye. Infectious keratitis can be caused by bacteria, viruses, fungi and parasites.If you have eye redness or other symptoms of keratitis, make an appointment to see an eye specialist. With prompt attention, mild to moderate cases of keratitis can usually be effectively treated without loss of vision. If left untreated, or if an infection is severe, keratitis can lead to serious complications that may permanently damage your vision.Symptoms of keratitis include:If you notice any of the symptoms of keratitis, make an appointment to see an eye specialist right away. Delays in diagnosis and treatment of keratitis can lead to serious complications, including blindness.Causes of keratitis include:Factors that may increase your risk of keratitis include:Contact lenses. Wearing contact lenses — especially sleeping in the lenses —increases your risk of both infectious and noninfectious keratitis. The risk typically stems from wearing them longer than recommended, improper disinfection or wearing contact lenses while swimming.Keratitis is more common in people who use extended-wear contacts, or wear contacts continuously, than in those who use daily wear contacts and take them out at night.Potential complications of keratitis include:If you wear contact lenses, proper use, cleaning and disinfecting can help prevent keratitis. Follow these tips:Some forms of viral keratitis can't be completely eliminated. But the following steps may control viral keratitis occurrences:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Injury.Bacteria, fungi or parasites.Viruses.Bacteria.Contaminated water.Contact lenses.Reduced immunity.Corticosteroids.Eye injury.Advertising & Sponsorship