Learn more from urologic oncologist Bradley Leibovich, M.D.I'm Dr. Brad Leibovich, urologic oncologist at Mayo Clinic. In this video, we'll cover the basics of kidney cancer: What is it? Who gets it? The symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment. Whether you're looking for answers for yourself or for someone you love, we're here to give you the best information available. First, let's talk about the kidney. You have two of these bean-shaped organs, each about the size of your fist. They sit right behind your abdominal organs with one on each side of the spine. It's their job to filter excess water, salt, and waste products from your body, turning those substances into urine. Like other organs, kidneys are made up of cellular tissue. Sometimes the cells in this tissue behave irregularly. Changes in their DNA make them grow in abnormal ways, forming tumors. This is how cancer develops. The most common type of kidney cancer is renal cell carcinoma. About nine out of 10 kidney cancers are this type. With improvements in technology, thankfully, come improvements in treatment. So in an encouraging turn, kidney cancer has never been more treatable than it is today.The average age of those diagnosed with kidney cancer is 64. It is about twice as common in men as it is in women. The exact causes of kidney cancer, like many other cancers, are not known. However, we do know that certain things can increase your chances of developing kidney cancer. Older age, smoking, obesity, high blood pressure, long-term dialysis, and a family history of kidney cancer can all increase your risk.Unfortunately, kidney cancer is often hard to diagnose, as it doesn't have clear signs or symptoms in its early stages. Over time, the following may develop: Blood in your urine, which may appear pink, red or cola colored. Pain in your back or side that does not go away. Loss of appetite. Unexplained weight loss. Persistent tiredness. Fever. Or night sweats. If you're worried that you may be experiencing these symptoms, please talk to your doctor.The way doctors evaluate kidney tumors may include one or more of the following tests and procedures: Blood and urine tests. Imaging tests like ultrasounds, x-rays, CT scans and MRIs, which can help visualize the tumor or abnormality. On occasion, your doctor may recommend a biopsy. This involves removing a small sample of tissue from the tumor with a needle for further testing. If it's determined that you have kidney cancer, the next step is staging that cancer. Staging is a medical term to describe how advanced your cancer is. Specific tests for staging could include further CT scans or other imaging tests. Once the doctor has enough information, they'll assign a Roman numeral ranging from 1 to 4 to indicate the stage of your cancer. The lower end means your cancer is confined to the kidney. The higher means the cancer is considered advanced and may have spread to the lymph nodes or other areas of the body.There are a few small upsides to kidney cancer versus others. The fact that we have two kidneys, and our bodies typically only need one to function normally, means that in many occasions, if the kidney cancer is localized and hasn't spread to other parts of the body, not only are the odds of surviving very good, but typically we do not have any negative impact on quality of life from the treatment for kidney cancer. For most, surgery is the first step. Depending upon the stage and severity of cancer, surgeons may remove the affected kidney altogether - a procedure known as a nephrectomy or radical nephrectomy. Sometimes they may opt to remove the tumor from the kidney. This is known as a partial nephrectomy or kidney-sparing or nephron-sparing surgery. In addition to surgery, some kidney cancers are destroyed by non-surgical methods. Cryoablation is a treatment that freezes and kills cancerous cells. Radiofrequency ablation is a treatment that causes the mutated cells to heat up, in effect disintegrating them. The best treatment for you depends on a handful of factors, including your overall health, the kind of kidney cancer you have, whether the cancer has spread and your preferences for treatment. Together, you and your medical team can decide what's right for you.Learning you've been diagnosed with cancer is never easy. But there are ways to cope with the daily challenges of processing your disease, treatment and recovery. Learning about your condition can help you feel comfortable when it comes to making decisions. Taking care of yourself is another. Stay active. Sleep well. Eat healthy. And if you feel up to it, keep doing the things you enjoy. Reach out to others. Your doctor can help you find a support group. Don't be afraid to ask for help if you need it. It's normal to feel overwhelmed, depressed or anxious. Sometimes talking to a mental health specialist can make all the difference. Remember, with the right treatment, the right team and the right mindset, there's always a road forward. If you'd like to learn even more about kidney cancer, here are our other related videos or visit mayoclinic.org. We wish you well.Kidney cancer is cancer that begins in the cells of your kidneys.Kidney cancer is cancer that begins in the kidneys. Your kidneys are two bean-shaped organs, each about the size of your fist. They're located behind your abdominal organs, with one kidney on each side of your spine.In adults, renal cell carcinoma is the most common type of kidney cancer. Other less common types of kidney cancer can occur. Young children are more likely to develop a kind of kidney cancer called Wilms' tumor.The incidence of kidney cancer seems to be increasing. One reason for this may be the fact that imaging techniques such as computerized tomography (CT) scans are being used more often. These tests may lead to the accidental discovery of more kidney cancers. Kidney cancer is often discovered at an early stage, when the cancer is small and confined to the kidney.Kidney cancer usually doesn't have signs or symptoms in its early stages. In time, signs and symptoms may develop, including:Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs or symptoms that worry you.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesIt's not clear what causes most kidney cancers.Doctors know that kidney cancer begins when some kidney cells develop changes (mutations) in their DNA. A cell's DNA contains the instructions that tell a cell what to do. The changes tell the cells to grow and divide rapidly. The accumulating abnormal cells form a tumor that can extend beyond the kidney. Some cells can break off and spread (metastasize) to distant parts of the body.Factors that can increase the risk of kidney cancer include:Taking steps to improve your health may help reduce your risk of kidney cancer. To reduce your risk, try to:Kidney cancer care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Kidney Cancer support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.17 Replies Tue, Jun 18, 2024 238 Replies Mon, Jun 10, 2024 31 Replies Mon, Jun 17, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Older age.Smoking.Obesity.High blood pressure (hypertension).Treatment for kidney failure.Certain inherited syndromes.Family history of kidney cancer.Quit smoking.Maintain a healthy weight.Control high blood pressure.Advertising & Sponsorship