Klippel-Trenaunay (klih-PEL tray-no-NAY) syndrome ― also called KTS ― is a rare disorder found at birth (congenital) involving problems in the development of certain blood vessels, soft tissues (such as skin and muscles), bones and sometimes the lymphatic system. The main features include a red birthmark (port-wine stain), ranging in color from pink to reddish-purple, atypical vein or lymphatic development (malformations), and overgrowth of tissues and bones. These findings most often affect one leg but may occur in an arm or elsewhere.Although there is no cure for KTS, treatment goals are to improve symptoms and prevent complications.People who have KTS may have the following features, which can range from mild to more extensive:KTS is usually identified at birth. It's important to get a prompt, accurate diagnosis and appropriate care to treat symptoms and prevent complications.KTS is a genetic disorder. It involves genetic changes (mutations), most commonly in the PIK3CA gene. This gene is responsible for the growth of cells and the development of tissues in the body. A change in this gene results in overgrowth of tissues.KTS is not usually inherited. The gene changes occur randomly during cell division in early development before birth.Family history doesn't seem to be a risk factor, so it's unlikely that parents of one child with KTS will have another child with the disorder, even if one of the parents has KTS.Complications of KTS can result from atypical development of blood vessels, soft tissues, bones and the lymphatic system. These can include:Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Port-wine stain.Vein malformations.Overgrowth of bones and soft tissue.Lymphatic system malformations.Other conditions.Port-wine stain complications.Vein malformations.Overgrowth of bones and soft tissue.Lymphatic system malformations.Chronic pain.Advertising & Sponsorship