Knee pain is a common complaint that affects people of all ages. Knee pain may be the result of an injury, such as a ruptured ligament or torn cartilage. Medical conditions — including arthritis, gout and infections — also can cause knee pain.Many types of minor knee pain respond well to self-care measures. Physical therapy and knee braces also can help relieve pain. In some cases, however, your knee may require surgical repair.The location and severity of knee pain may vary, depending on the cause of the problem. Signs and symptoms that sometimes accompany knee pain include:Call your doctor if you:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesKnee pain can be caused by injuries, mechanical problems, types of arthritis and other problems.The anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) is one of the key ligaments that help stabilize the knee joint. The ACL connects the thighbone (femur) to the shinbone (tibia). It's most commonly torn during sports that involve sudden stops and changes in direction — such as basketball, soccer, tennis and volleyball.The meniscus is a C-shaped piece of tough, rubbery cartilage that acts as a shock absorber between the shinbone and the thighbone. It can be torn if you suddenly twist your knee while bearing weight on it.A knee injury can affect any of the ligaments, tendons or fluid-filled sacs (bursae) that surround your knee joint as well as the bones, cartilage and ligaments that form the joint itself. Some of the more common knee injuries include:Some examples of mechanical problems that can cause knee pain include:More than 100 different types of arthritis exist. The varieties most likely to affect the knee include:Patellofemoral pain syndrome is a general term that refers to pain arising between the kneecap and the underlying thighbone. It's common in athletes; in young adults, especially those whose kneecap doesn't track properly in its groove; and in older adults, who usually develop the condition as a result of arthritis of the kneecap.A number of factors can increase your risk of having knee problems, including:Not all knee pain is serious. But some knee injuries and medical conditions, such as osteoarthritis, can lead to increasing pain, joint damage and disability if left untreated. And having a knee injury — even a minor one — makes it more likely that you'll have similar injuries in the future.Although it's not always possible to prevent knee pain, the following suggestions may help ward off injuries and joint deterioration:Get strong, stay flexible. Weak muscles are a leading cause of knee injuries. You'll benefit from building up your quadriceps and hamstrings, the muscles on the front and back of your thighs that help support your knees. Balance and stability training helps the muscles around your knees work together more effectively.And because tight muscles also can contribute to injury, stretching is important. Try to include flexibility exercises in your workouts.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.ACL injury.Fractures.Torn meniscus.Knee bursitis.Patellar tendinitis.Loose body.Iliotibial band syndrome.Dislocated kneecap.Hip or foot pain.Osteoarthritis.Rheumatoid arthritis.Gout.Pseudogout.Septic arthritis.Excess weight.Lack of muscle flexibility or strength.Certain sports or occupations.Previous injury.Keep extra pounds off.Be in shape to play your sport.Practice perfectly.Get strong, stay flexible.Be smart about exercise.Advertising & Sponsorship