Bursae are small fluid-filled sacs, shown in blue. They lessen friction between moving parts in the body's joints. Knee bursitis is swelling, also called inflammation, of one or more of the bursae in the knee.Knee bursitis is a condition in which one or more small fluid-filled sacs near the knee joint become inflamed. The sacs are called bursae. Bursae reduce friction and cushion pressure points between bones and tendons, muscles and skin near the joints.Any of the bursae in the knee can be affected by painful swelling, also called inflammation. But most often, knee bursitis happens over the kneecap or on the inner side of the knee below the joint.Knee bursitis causes pain and can limit your movement. Treatment often includes a mix of self-care techniques and medical treatments to ease pain and inflammation.Knee bursitis symptoms vary. They depend on which bursa is affected and what's causing the inflammation.The affected portion of your knee might feel warm, tender and swollen. You also might feel pain when you move or when you're at rest.A direct blow to the knee can cause symptoms to come on fast. But knee bursitis often stems from friction and irritation of the bursae. This can occur with jobs that require a lot of kneeling on hard surfaces. So, the symptoms can start slowly and become worse over time.Sometimes, the bursa that lies over the kneecap can become infected. Call your healthcare professional if you have:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesKnee bursitis can be caused by:Factors that can raise the risk of getting knee bursitis include:The following tips can help you prevent bursitis or keep it from coming back:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Prolonged kneeling.Playing certain sports.Obesity and osteoarthritis.Wear kneepads.Take breaks.Reach and stay at a healthy weight.Advertising & Sponsorship