Latex allergy is a reaction to certain proteins found in natural rubber latex, a product made from the rubber tree. If you have a latex allergy, your body mistakes latex for a harmful substance.Latex allergy may cause itchy skin and hives or even anaphylaxis, a potentially life-threatening condition that can cause throat swelling and severe difficulty breathing. Your health care provider can determine if you have a latex allergy or if you're at risk of developing a latex allergy.Understanding latex allergy and knowing common sources of latex can help you prevent allergic reactions.If you're allergic to latex, you're likely to have symptoms after touching latex rubber products, such as gloves or balloons. You also can have symptoms if you breathe in latex particles that are released into the air when someone removes latex gloves.Latex allergy symptoms range from mild to severe. A reaction depends on how sensitive you are to latex and the amount of latex you touch or inhale. Your reaction can become worse with each additional latex exposure.Mild latex allergy symptoms include:These include:The most serious allergic reaction to latex is anaphylaxis, which can be deadly. An anaphylactic (an-uh-fuh-LAK-tik) reaction develops immediately after latex exposure in highly sensitive people. However, it rarely happens the first time you're exposed.Symptoms of anaphylaxis include:Seek emergency medical care if you are having or think you're having an anaphylactic reaction.If you have less severe reactions after exposure to latex, talk to your health care provider. If possible, see your provider when you're reacting. This will help with diagnosis.In a latex allergy, your immune system identifies latex as a harmful substance and triggers certain antibodies to fight it off. The next time you're exposed to latex, these antibodies tell your immune system to release histamine and other chemicals into your bloodstream. This process produces a range of allergy symptoms. The more times you are exposed to latex, the more strongly your immune system is likely to respond. This is called sensitization.Latex allergy can occur in these ways:It's possible to have other skin reactions when using latex. They include:Not all latex products are made from natural sources. Products containing synthetic materials, such as latex paint, are unlikely to cause a reaction.Certain people are at greater risk of developing a latex allergy:Certain fruits contain the same allergens found in latex. They include:If you're allergic to latex, you have a greater chance of also being allergic to these foods.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Direct contact.Inhalation.Allergic contact dermatitis.Irritant contact dermatitis.People with spina bifida.People who undergo multiple surgeries or medical procedures.Health care workers.Rubber industry workers.People with a personal or family history of allergies.Advertising & Sponsorship