Left ventricular hypertrophy is a thickening of the wall of the heart's main pumping chamber. This thickening may result in elevation of pressure within the heart and sometimes poor pumping action. The most common cause is high blood pressure.Left ventricular hypertrophy is thickening of the walls of the lower left heart chamber. The lower left heart chamber is called the left ventricle. The left ventricle is the heart's main pumping chamber.During left ventricular hypertrophy, the thickened heart wall can become stiff. Blood pressure in the heart increases. The changes make it harder for the heart to effectively pump blood. Eventually, the heart may fail to pump with as much force as needed.Uncontrolled high blood pressure is the most common cause of left ventricular hypertrophy. Complications include irregular heart rhythms, called arrhythmias, and heart failure.Treatment of left ventricular hypertrophy depends on the cause. Treatment may include medications or surgery.Left ventricular hypertrophy usually develops gradually. Some people do not have symptoms, especially during the early stages of the condition.Left ventricular hypertrophy itself doesn't cause symptoms. But symptoms may occur as the strain on the heart worsens. They may include:Seek emergency care if:If you have mild shortness of breath or other symptoms, such as palpitations, see your health care provider.If you have high blood pressure or another condition that increases the risk of left ventricular hypertrophy, your provider is likely to recommend regular health checkups to check your heart.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesAnything that puts stress on the heart's lower left chamber can lead to left ventricular hypertrophy. The lower left chamber is called the left ventricle. As the strain on the left ventricle increases, the muscle tissue in the chamber wall thickens. Sometimes, the size of the heart chamber itself also increases.Left ventricular hypertrophy also may be caused by gene changes that affect the heart muscle's structure.Things that can cause the heart to work harder and may possibly lead to left ventricular hypertrophy include:Certain conditions passed down through families — called genetic conditions — can make the heart thicker. They include:Things that increase the risk of left ventricular hypertrophy include:Left ventricular hypertrophy changes the structure and function of the heart. The thickened left ventricle becomes weak and stiff. This prevents the lower left heart chamber from filling properly with blood. As a result, blood pressure in the heart increases.As a result of these changes, complications of left ventricular hypertrophy include:The same healthy lifestyle changes recommended to treat heart diseases and high blood pressure also help prevent it. To prevent left ventricular hypertrophy caused by high blood pressure:Uncontrolled high blood pressure increases the risk of left ventricular hypertrophy. Get your blood pressure checked at least every two years if you're 18 and older. If you have risk factors for heart disease or are over age 40, you may need more-frequent checks. Ask your health care provider what blood pressure reading is best for you. Your provider may recommend checking your blood pressure at home. Home blood pressure monitoring devices are available at local stores and pharmacies.Our patients tell us that the quality of their interactions, our attention to detail and the efficiency of their visits mean health care like they've never experienced. See the stories of satisfied Mayo Clinic patients.In Steve Bernstein, M.D.'s neighborhood, Halloween is a fun time for children and families. Dressed in their costumes, they visit neighbors' homes; the chorus of "Trick or Treat" rings out as goodies are dropped in their bags. Halloween 2022 was particularly remarkable for Dr. Bernstein, however. He'd undergone a minimally invasive aortic valve replacement surgery just four days earlier but now felt well enough to join the trick-or-treaters. Dr. Bernstein's path to this remarkable recovery…Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart & Blood Health support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.346 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 58 Replies Thu, Jun 20, 2024 106 Replies Wed, Jun 19, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.High blood pressure.Narrowing of the aortic valve.Intensive athletic training.Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.Amyloidosis.Age.Weight.Family history.Diabetes.Female gender.Advertising & Sponsorship