The hip joint is a ball-and-socket joint. The ball, called the femoral head, is at the top of the thigh bone, called the femur. The socket, called the acetabulum, is part of the hipbone.Legg-Calve-Perthes (LEG-kahl-VAY-PER-tuz) disease is a childhood condition that occurs when blood supply to the ball part (femoral head) of the hip joint is temporarily interrupted and the bone begins to die.This weakened bone gradually breaks apart and can lose its round shape. The body eventually restores blood supply to the ball, and the ball heals. But if the ball is no longer round after it heals, it can cause pain and stiffness. The complete process of bone death, fracture and renewal can take several years.To keep the ball part of the joint as round as possible, doctors use a variety of treatments that keep it snug in the socket portion of the joint. The socket acts as a mold for the fragmented femoral head as it heals.Symptoms of Perthes disease include:Perthes disease usually involves just one hip. Both hips can be affected, but they usually are affected at different times.Make an appointment with your healthcare professional if your child begins limping or complains of hip, groin or knee pain. If your child has a fever or can't bear weight on the leg, seek emergency medical care.Perthes disease occurs when too little blood reaches the ball portion of the hip joint for a short time. Without enough blood, this bone becomes weak and collapses. The cause of the reduced blood flow is unknown.Risk factors for Perthes disease include:Children who have had Perthes disease are at higher risk of developing hip arthritis in adulthood — especially if the hip joint has poor healing. If the ball-and-socket joint doesn't fit together well after healing, the joint can wear out early.In general, children who are diagnosed with Perthes disease after age 6 are more likely to develop hip conditions later in life. The younger the child is at the time of diagnosis, the better the chances for the hip joint to heal in a typical, round shape.Legg-Calve-Perthes disease care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Age.Your child's sex.Advertising & Sponsorship