Leukemia is cancer of the body's blood-forming tissues, including the bone marrow and the lymphatic system.Many types of leukemia exist. Some forms of leukemia are more common in children. Other forms of leukemia occur mostly in adults.Leukemia usually involves the white blood cells. Your white blood cells are potent infection fighters — they normally grow and divide in an orderly way, as your body needs them. But in people with leukemia, the bone marrow produces an excessive amount of abnormal white blood cells, which don't function properly.Treatment for leukemia can be complex — depending on the type of leukemia and other factors. But there are strategies and resources that can help make your treatment successful.Leukemia symptoms vary, depending on the type of leukemia. Common leukemia signs and symptoms include:Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs or symptoms that worry you.Leukemia symptoms are often vague and not specific. You may overlook early leukemia symptoms because they may resemble symptoms of the flu and other common illnesses.Sometimes leukemia is discovered during blood tests for some other condition.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe lymphatic system is part of the body's immune system, which protects against infection and disease. The lymphatic system includes the spleen, thymus, lymph nodes and lymph channels, as well as the tonsils and adenoids.Scientists don't understand the exact causes of leukemia. It seems to develop from a combination of genetic and environmental factors.In general, leukemia is thought to occur when some blood cells acquire changes (mutations) in their genetic material or DNA. A cell's DNA contains the instructions that tell a cell what to do. Normally, the DNA tells the cell to grow at a set rate and to die at a set time. In leukemia, the mutations tell the blood cells to continue growing and dividing.When this happens, blood cell production becomes out of control. Over time, these abnormal cells can crowd out healthy blood cells in the bone marrow, leading to fewer healthy white blood cells, red blood cells and platelets, causing the signs and symptoms of leukemia.Doctors classify leukemia based on its speed of progression and the type of cells involved.The first type of classification is by how fast the leukemia progresses:The second type of classification is by type of white blood cell affected:The major types of leukemia are:Factors that may increase your risk of developing some types of leukemia include:However, most people with known risk factors don't get leukemia. And many people with leukemia have none of these risk factors.Leukemia care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the CAR-T Cell Therapy support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.78 Replies Fri, Jun 21, 2024 100 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 402 Replies Tue, Jun 18, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Acute leukemia.Chronic leukemia.Lymphocytic leukemia.Myelogenous (my-uh-LOHJ-uh-nus) leukemia.Acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL).Acute myelogenous leukemia (AML).Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL).Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML).Other types.Previous cancer treatment.Genetic disorders.Exposure to certain chemicals.Smoking.Family history of leukemia.Advertising & Sponsorship