Leukoplakia appears as thick, white patches on the inside surfaces of the mouth. It has several possible causes, including repeated injury or irritation. It also can be a sign of mouth cancer or a sign of changes that could lead to cancer.Leukoplakia (loo-koh-PLAY-key-uh) causes thick, white patches that form on the gums. The patches also may form on the insides of the cheeks and the bottom of the mouth. Sometimes the patches form on the tongue. These patches cannot be scraped off.Doctors do not know the exact cause of leukoplakia. But ongoing irritation from tobacco — whether smoked, dipped or chewed — may be the most common cause. Long-term alcohol use is another possible cause.Most leukoplakia patches are not cancer. But some patches show early signs of cancer. Cancers in the mouth can occur next to areas of leukoplakia. White areas mixed with red areas, also called speckled leukoplakia, may possibly lead to cancer. It's best to see your dentist or doctor if you have any changes in your mouth that do not go away.A type of leukoplakia in the mouth called hairy leukoplakia mainly affects people whose immune systems have been weakened by disease, especially HIV/AIDS.Leukoplakia usually occurs on the gums, the insides of the cheeks, the bottom of the mouth under the tongue and, sometimes, the tongue. Usually it is not painful and it may not be noticed for a while.Leukoplakia may appear as:White patches of leukoplakia may appear along with raised, red areas called erythroplakia (uh-rith-roe-PLAY-key-uh). This combination is called speckled leukoplakia. These patches are more likely to show changes that may lead to cancer.Hairy leukoplakia causes fuzzy, white patches that look like folds or ridges. The patches usually form on the sides of the tongue. Hairy leukoplakia is often mistaken as oral thrush, an infection that causes creamy white patches that can be wiped away. Oral thrush also is common in people with weak immune systems.Even though leukoplakia does not usually cause discomfort, sometimes it can suggest a more serious condition.See your doctor or other healthcare professional if you have any of these:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe exact cause of leukoplakia is not known. But long-term irritation from tobacco use — smoked and smokeless — appears to be strongly related to many cases. Often, regular users of smokeless tobacco products get leukoplakia in places where they hold the tobacco between their gums and cheeks.The use of betel nut, also called an areca nut, may be a cause of leukoplakia. A betel nut packet, like smokeless tobacco, is held between the gum and cheek.Other possible causes may include ongoing irritation from:Your doctor or other healthcare professional can talk with you about what may be causing leukoplakia.Hairy leukoplakia results from infection with the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Once you've been infected with EBV, the virus remains in your body for life. Usually the virus is not active and does not cause symptoms. But if your immune system is weakened, especially from HIV/AIDS, the virus can become active. This can lead to conditions such as hairy leukoplakia.Tobacco use, particularly smokeless tobacco, puts you at high risk of leukoplakia and mouth cancer. Long-term, heavy alcohol use increases your risk. Drinking alcohol combined with using tobacco increases your risk even more.People with HIV/AIDS are especially likely to develop hairy leukoplakia. The use of medicines that slow down or prevent HIV activity has reduced the number of people who get hairy leukoplakia. But it still affects many people who are HIV positive. It may be one of the early signs of HIV infection.Leukoplakia usually does not cause permanent damage to the inside of the mouth. But leukoplakia increases the risk of mouth cancer. Mouth cancers often form near leukoplakia patches. And the patches themselves may show cancerous changes. Even after leukoplakia patches are removed, the risk of mouth cancer remains.Hairy leukoplakia is not likely to lead to cancer. But it may be an early symptom of HIV/AIDS.You may be able to prevent leukoplakia if you avoid all tobacco products or alcohol use. Talk to your doctor or other healthcare professional about ways to help you quit. If you continue to smoke or chew tobacco or drink alcohol, have dental checkups often. Mouth cancers are usually painless until advanced. Quitting tobacco and alcohol is a better way to prevent mouth cancers.If you have a weak immune system, you may not be able to prevent hairy leukoplakia. But finding it early can help you get proper treatment.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship