Head lice occur on the scalp and are easiest to see at the nape of the neck and over the ears. Small nits (eggs) resembling tiny pussy willow buds about the size of dandruff flakes are visible on hair shafts.Lice are tiny, wingless insects that feed on human blood. Lice spread from person to person through close contact and by sharing belongings.There are three types of lice:Unless treated properly, lice can become a recurring problem.Head lice feed on blood from the scalp. The female louse lays eggs (nits) that stick to hair shafts.Common signs and symptoms of lice include:See your health care provider if you suspect you or your child has lice. Things often mistaken for nits include:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesLice feed on human blood and can be found on the human head, body and pubic area. The female louse produces a sticky substance that firmly attaches each egg to the base of a hair shaft. Eggs hatch in 6 to 9 days.You can get lice by coming into contact with either lice or their eggs. Lice can't jump or fly. They spread through:It's difficult to prevent the spread of head lice among children in child care and school settings. There's so much close contact among children and their belongings that lice can spread easily. The presence of head lice isn't a reflection of hygiene habits. It's also not a failure on the parent if a child gets head lice.Some nonprescription products claim to repel lice. But more research is needed to prove their safety and effectiveness.Many small studies have shown that ingredients in some of these products — mostly plant oils such as coconut, olive, rosemary and tea tree — may work to repel lice. However, these products are classified as "natural," so they aren't regulated by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Their safety and effectiveness haven't been tested to FDA standards.Until more research proves the effectiveness of head lice prevention products, the best approach is simply to take thorough steps to get rid of lice and their eggs if you find them on your child. In the meantime, these steps can help prevent lice:However, it's not realistic to expect that you and your child can avoid all contact that may cause the spread of lice.Your child may have nits in his or her hair but may not develop a case of head lice. Some nits are empty eggs. However, nits that are found within 1/4 inch (6 millimeters) of the scalp typically should be treated — even if you find only one — to prevent the possibility of hatching.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Head liceBody licePubic lice,Intense itchingA tickling feelingThe presence of lice on your scalp, body, clothing, or pubic or other body hair.Lice eggs (nits) on hair shafts.Sores on the scalp, neck and shoulders.Bite marks,Head-to-head or body-to-body contact.Closely stored belongings.Items shared among friends or family members.Contact with furniture that has lice on it.Sexual contact.Ask your child to avoid head-to-head contactTeach your child not to share personal belongingsTell your child to avoid shared spacesAdvertising & Sponsorship