Lichen sclerosus (LIE-kun skluh-ROW-sus) is a condition that causes patchy, discolored, thin skin. It usually affects the genital and anal areas.Anyone can get lichen sclerosus but postmenopausal women are at higher risk. It isn't contagious and can't be spread through sexual contact.Treatment is usually a medicated ointment. This treatment helps return the skin to its usual color and reduces the risk of scarring. Even if your symptoms clear up, they tend to come back. So you'll likely need long-term follow-up care.Lichen sclerosus is a skin condition characterized by discolored, blotchy patches of skin.Lichen sclerosus may affect skin on any part of your body but often involves the skin of the genital area.It's possible to have mild lichen sclerosus with no symptoms. When symptoms do occur, they usually affect the skin of the genital and anal areas. The back, shoulders, upper arms and breasts may also be affected. Symptoms may include:See your health care provider if you have symptoms of lichen sclerosus.If you've already been diagnosed with lichen sclerosus, see your health care provider every 6 to 12 months. These visits are important to check for any skin changes or side effects of treatment.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe exact cause of lichen sclerosus isn't known. It's likely a combination of factors, including an overactive immune system, your genetic makeup, and previous skin damage or irritation.Lichen sclerosus isn't contagious and can't be spread through sexual contact.Anyone can get lichen sclerosus, but the risk is higher for:Complications of lichen sclerosus include painful sex and scarring, including covering of the clitoris. Scarring of the penis can cause painful erection, poor urine flow and an inability to retract the foreskin.People with vulvar lichen sclerosus are also at an increased risk of squamous cell carcinoma.In children, constipation is a common complication.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship