Lichen planus (LIE-kun PLAY-nus) is a condition of the skin, hair, nails, mouth and genitals. On skin, lichen planus often appears as purple, itchy, flat bumps that develop over several weeks. In the mouth and genital mucosa, lichen planus forms lacy white patches, sometimes with painful sores.Mild lichen planus of the skin may not need treatment. If the condition causes pain or intense itching, you may need prescription medicine.Symptoms of lichen planus vary depending on the part of the body affected. Nail disease usually affects several nails. Symptoms include:See your health care provider if tiny bumps or a rash appears on your skin for no known reason, such as contact with poison ivy. Also see your health care provider if you have any symptoms related to lichen planus of the mouth, genitals, scalp or nails.It's best to get a prompt and correct diagnosis because a number of skin and mucous membrane conditions can cause sores and pain.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe cause of lichen planus is likely related to the immune system attacking cells of the skin or mucous membranes. It's not clear why this irregular immune response happens. The condition isn't contagious.Lichen planus may be activated by:Anyone can develop lichen planus. It most often affects middle-aged adults. Lichen planus in the mouth is more likely to affect women than men.Lichen planus can be difficult to treat on the vulva and in the vagina. It can cause scarring and severe pain. Sores on the genitals can make sex painful.The affected skin and nails might stay slightly darker even after healing.Oral sores may affect your ability to eat. Oral lichen planus increases the risk of oral cancer. Rarely, lichen planus affects the ear canal. Left untreated, it may lead to hearing loss.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship