The liver is the largest internal organ in the body. It's about the size of a football. It sits mainly in the upper right portion of the stomach area, above the stomach.The liver is an organ that sits just under the rib cage on the right side of the abdomen. It can weigh up to 4 pounds (1.8 kilograms). The liver is needed to help digest food, rid the body of waste products and make substances, called clotting factors, that keep the blood flowing well, among other tasks.Liver disease can be passed through families, called inherited. Anything that damages the liver also can cause liver problems, including viruses, alcohol use and obesity.Over time, conditions that damage the liver can lead to scarring, called cirrhosis. Cirrhosis can lead to liver failure, a life-threatening condition. But early treatment may give the liver time to heal.Liver problems that can occur include fatty liver disease and cirrhosis. The liver and its cells, as seen through a microscope, change greatly when a liver becomes fatty or cirrhotic.Liver disease doesn't always cause symptoms that can be seen or felt. If there are symptoms of liver disease, they may include:Make an appointment with your healthcare professional if you have any lasting symptoms that worry you. Seek medical help right away if you have belly pain that is so bad that you can't stay still.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesLiver disease has many causes.Parasites and viruses can infect the liver, causing swelling and irritation, called inflammation. Inflammation keeps the liver from working as it should. The viruses that cause liver damage can be spread through blood or semen, bad food or water, or close contact with a person who is infected.The most common types of liver infection are hepatitis viruses, including:Diseases in which the immune system attacks certain parts of the body are called autoimmune diseases. Autoimmune liver diseases include:A changed gene from one or both parents can cause substances to build up in the liver. This can cause liver damage. Genetic liver diseases include:Examples include:Other common causes of liver disease include:Factors that can increase the risk of liver disease include:Complications of liver disease depend on the cause of the liver problems. Without treatment, liver disease may progress to liver failure. Liver failure can be fatal.To prevent liver disease:Liver disease care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.If you choose to drink alcohol, do so in moderation.Avoid risky behavior.Get vaccinated.Be careful when taking medicines.Stay away from other people's blood and body fluids.Keep your food safe.Take care with aerosol sprays.Protect your skin.Maintain a healthy weight.Advertising & Sponsorship