Women's levels of sexual desire change over the years. It's common for highs and lows to happen along with the start or end of a relationship. Or they can happen with major life changes such as pregnancy, menopause or illness. Some medicines used for conditions that affect mood also can cause low sex drive in women.If your lack of interest in sex continues or returns and causes personal distress, talk with your healthcare professional. You may have a treatable condition called sexual interest-arousal disorder.But you don't have to meet this medical definition to seek help. If you're bothered by a low or reduced sex drive, you can take steps to boost your libido. Lifestyle changes and sexual techniques may put you in the mood more often. Some medicines may offer promise as well.neither of you may have a sex drive that's outside what's typical for people at your stage in life.And even if your sex drive is lower than it once was, your relationship may be strong. Bottom line: There is no magic number to define low sex drive. It varies.Symptoms of low sex drive in women include:If you're concerned about your low desire for sex, talk to your gynecologist or other healthcare professional. The answer might be as simple as changing a medicine that you take. Or you may need to get a condition such as high blood pressure or diabetes under tighter control.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Get the latest information from our Mayo Clinic experts on women’s health topics, serious and complex conditions, wellness and more. Click to view a preview and subscribe below.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesDesire for sex is based on a complex mix of many things that affect intimacy. These factors include:If you have challenges in any of these areas, it can affect your desire for sex.A variety of illnesses, physical changes and medicines can cause low sex drive, including:Changes in your hormone levels may alter your desire for sex. This can occur during:Your state of mind can affect your sexual desire. Psychological causes of low sex drive include:For many people, emotional closeness is a key to sexual intimacy. So problems in your relationship can be a major factor in low sex drive. Often, less interest in sex is a result of ongoing issues such as:Factors that can raise the risk of low sex drive include:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Sexual conditions.Diseases.Medicines.Lifestyle habits.Surgery.Fatigue.Menopause.Pregnancy and breastfeeding.Advertising & Sponsorship