Low blood pressure is a condition in which the force of the blood pushing against the artery walls is too low. It's also called hypotension.Blood pressure is measured in millimeters of mercury (mm Hg). In general, low blood pressure is a reading lower than 90/60 mm Hg.What's considered low blood pressure for one person might be OK for someone else though. Low blood pressure might cause no symptoms that you notice. Or it might cause dizziness and fainting. Sometimes, low blood pressure can be life-threatening.The causes of low blood pressure include dehydration and other serious medical conditions. It's important to find out what's causing low blood pressure so that it can be treated, if needed.Types of low blood pressure include:Low blood pressure symptoms can include:For some people, low blood pressure may be a symptom of an underlying health condition. That's especially so when blood pressure drops suddenly or when low blood pressure occurs with symptoms.A sudden fall in blood pressure can be dangerous. A change of just 20 mm Hg can make you feel dizzy or faint. For example, those symptoms could happen after a drop in systolic pressure from 110 mm Hg to 90 mm Hg. And big drops can be life-threatening. These can happen for reasons such as serious bleeding, serious infections or allergic reactions.Extreme low blood pressure can lead to a condition known as shock. Symptoms of shock include:If you have symptoms of extreme low blood pressure or shock, call 911 or your local emergency number.Most healthcare professionals consider blood pressure to be too low only if it causes symptoms. Minor dizzy or lightheaded feelings from time to time can be caused by many things. Causes could include spending too much time in the sun or in a hot tub. It's important to see a healthcare professional to find out the cause of your symptoms.If you often have low blood pressure readings but feel fine, you might not need treatment. Instead, your healthcare professional tracks your health during routine checkups. It can help to keep a record of your symptoms, when they occur and what you're doing at the time.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesLow blood pressure has various causes. Some health conditions and the use of certain medicines can cause it. Other factors affect blood pressure as well.Blood pressure is determined by the amount of blood the heart pumps and the amount of resistance to blood flow in the arteries. A blood pressure reading has two numbers:The American Heart Association classifies healthy blood pressure as normal. Normal blood pressure usually is lower than 120/80 mm Hg.Blood pressure varies throughout the day. It depends on:Blood pressure usually is lowest at night and rises sharply on waking.Medical conditions that can cause low blood pressure include:Some medicines can cause low blood pressure, including:Anyone can have low blood pressure. Risk factors for hypotension include:Complications of low blood pressure can include:Severely low blood pressure can lower the body's oxygen levels, which can lead to heart and brain damage.Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart & Blood Health support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.346 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 58 Replies Thu, Jun 20, 2024 106 Replies Wed, Jun 19, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Orthostatic hypotension, also called postural hypotension.Postprandial hypotension.Neurally mediated hypotension.Multiple system atrophy with orthostatic hypotension.Top number, called systolic pressure.Bottom number, called diastolic pressure.Pregnancy.Heart and heart valve conditions.Hormone-related diseases, also called endocrine conditions.Dehydration.Blood loss.Severe infection.Severe allergic reaction, also called anaphylaxis.Lack of nutrients in the diet.Age.Medications.Certain diseases.Alcohol or illegal drugs.Advertising & Sponsorship