Lyme disease is an illness caused by borrelia bacteria. Humans usually get Lyme disease from the bite of a tick carrying the bacteria.Ticks that can carry borrelia bacteria live throughout most of the United States. But Lyme disease is most common in the upper Midwest and the northeastern and mid-Atlantic states. It's also common in Europe and in south central and southeastern Canada.You're at risk of Lyme disease if you spend time where the ticks live, such as grassy, brushy or wooded areas. Taking safety measures in these areas can lower the risk of Lyme disease.A tick bite may look like as a tiny, itchy bump on your skin, much like a mosquito bite. This doesn't mean you have a tick-borne disease. Many people will not notice they've had a tick bite.The symptoms of Lyme disease vary. They usually show up in stages. But the stages can overlap. And some people don't have symptoms of the typical early stage.Illustration of Lyme disease rash on different skin colors. People with Lyme disease might get a bull's-eye rash. The rash gradually spreads over a period of days.Early symptoms of Lyme disease usually happen within 3 to 30 days after a tick bite. This stage of disease has a limited set of symptoms. This is called early localized disease.A rash is a common sign of Lyme disease. But it doesn't always happen. The rash is usually a single circle that slowly spreads from the site of the tick bite. It may become clear in the center and look like a target or bull's-eye. The rash often feels warm to the touch, But it's usually not painful or itchy.Other stage 1 symptoms include:Without treatment, Lyme disease can get worse. The symptoms often show up within 3 to 10 weeks after a tick bite. Stage 2 is often more serious and widespread. It is called early disseminated disease.Stage 2 may include the stage 1 symptoms and the following:In the third stage, you may have symptoms from the earlier stages and other symptoms. This stage is called late disseminated disease.In the United States, the most common condition of this stage is arthritis in large joints, particularly the knees. Pain, swelling or stiffness may last for a long time. Or the symptoms may come and go. Stage 3 symptoms usually begin 2 to 12 months after a tick bite.The type of Lyme disease common in Europe can cause a skin condition called acrodermatitis chronic atrophicans. The skin on the backs of the hands and tops of the feet get discolored and swell. It also may show up over the elbows and knees. More-serious cases may cause damage to tissues or joints.This skin condition may show up many months to many years after a tick bite.Most people who get Lyme disease don't remember having a tick bite. And many symptoms of Lyme disease relate to other conditions. See your health care provider if you have Lyme disease symptoms. An early diagnosis and proper treatment can improve outcomes.If you know you had a tick bite or might have been around ticks, watch for symptoms. If they show up, see your care provider as soon as possible.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe deer tick (Ixodes scapularis) goes through three life stages. Shown from left to right is the adult female, adult male, nymph and larva on a centimeter scale.Lyme disease is caused by borrelia bacteria. In North America, the black-legged tick, also called the deer tick, mainly carry the bacteria.In Europe, a different species of borrelia causes Lyme disease. Ticks carry the bacteria. These ticks are known by a few names, including castor bean tick, sheep tick or deer tick.Ticks feed on blood by attaching to a host's skin. The tick feeds until it's swollen to many times its typical size. Deer ticks can feed on a host's blood for several days.Ticks pick up bacteria from a host, such as a deer or rodent. They don't get sick. But they can pass the bacteria to another host. When an infected tick feeds on a person, the bacteria can move to the person's bloodstream. The bacteria are less likely to spread Lyme disease if you remove the tick within 24 hours.Both young and adult ticks can carry the disease. Young ticks are tiny and hard to spot. You may not notice if a young tick bites you.Your risk for getting Lyme disease depends on if you spend time where they are likely to live. This includes the:Some people with Lyme disease report symptoms that continue after treatment. These longer-lasting symptoms may include:These conditions are not clearly understood. Some people with these symptoms may be diagnosed with post-treatment Lyme disease syndrome, or PTLDS. These long-lasting problems may be caused by:The best way to prevent Lyme disease is to avoid tick bites when you are outdoors. Most ticks attach themselves to your lower legs and feet as you walk or work in grassy, wooded areas or overgrown fields. After a tick attaches to your body, it often crawls upward to find a spot to burrow into your skin.If you're in or plan to be in an area where ticks are likely to live, follow these tips to protect yourself.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.A rashRegion.Habitat.Time of year.Advertising & Sponsorship