Lynch syndrome is a condition that increases the risk of many kinds of cancer. This condition is passed from parents to children.Families that have Lynch syndrome have more instances of cancer than expected. This might include colon cancer, endometrial cancer and other types of cancer. Lynch syndrome also causes cancers to happen at an earlier age.People with Lynch syndrome may need careful testing to look for cancer when it's small. Treatment is more likely to be successful when the cancer is caught early. Some people with Lynch syndrome might consider treatments to prevent cancer.Lynch syndrome used to be called hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC). HNPCC is a term used to describe families with a strong history of colon cancer. Lynch syndrome is the term used when doctors find a gene that runs in the family and causes cancer.People with Lynch syndrome may experience:If a family member has Lynch syndrome, tell your health care provider. Ask your provider to help set up an appointment with a professional trained in genetics, such as a genetic counselor. This person can help you understand Lynch syndrome, what causes it and whether genetic testing is right for you.Lynch syndrome is caused by genes that are passed from parents to children.Genes are pieces of DNA. DNA is like a set of instructions for every chemical process that happens in the body.As cells grow and make new cells as part of their lifecycle, they make copies of their DNA. Sometimes the copies have errors. The body has a set of genes that hold the instructions for finding the errors and fixing them. Doctors call these genes mismatch repair genes.People with Lynch syndrome have mismatch repair genes that don't work as expected. If an error happens in the DNA, it might not get fixed. This could cause cells that grow out of control and become cancer cells.Lynch syndrome runs in families in an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. This means that if one parent has genes that cause Lynch syndrome, there's a 50% chance that each child will have the genes that cause Lynch syndrome. Which parent carries the gene doesn't affect the risk.Knowing that you have Lynch syndrome can raise concerns about your health. It may also raise some concerns about other parts of your life. These might include:Lynch syndrome care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Colorectal Cancer support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.57 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 87 Replies Mon, Jun 17, 2024 35 Replies Wed, Jun 12, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Your privacy.Your children.Your extended family.Advertising & Sponsorship