Male breast cancer is a rare cancer that begins as a growth of cells in the breast tissue of men.Breast cancer is typically thought of as a condition that happens in women. But everyone is born with some breast tissue. So anyone can get breast cancer.Male breast cancer is rare. It happens most often in older men, though it can occur at any age.Treatment for male breast cancer typically involves surgery to remove the breast tissue. Other treatments, such as chemotherapy and radiation therapy, may be recommended as well.Signs and symptoms of male breast cancer can include:Make an appointment with a doctor or other health care professional if you have symptoms that worry you.It's not clear what causes male breast cancer.Male breast cancer starts when cells in the breast tissue develop changes in their DNA. A cell's DNA holds the instructions that tell the cell what to do. In healthy cells, the DNA gives instructions to grow and multiply at a set rate. The instructions tell the cells to die at a set time.In cancer cells, the DNA changes give different instructions. The changes tell the cancer cells to make many more cells quickly. Cancer cells can keep living when healthy cells would die. This causes too many cells.The cancer cells might form a mass called a tumor. The tumor can grow to invade and destroy healthy body tissue. In time, cancer cells can break away and spread to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads, it's called metastatic cancer.Everyone is born with a small amount of breast tissue. Breast tissue consists of milk-producing glands, ducts that carry milk to the nipples and fat.During puberty, people assigned female at birth typically begin growing more breast tissue. People assigned male at birth generally do not grow more breast tissue. But because everyone is born with a small amount of breast tissue, breast cancer can develop in anyone.Types of male breast cancer include: Factors that increase the risk of male breast cancer include:For most men, there's no way to prevent male breast cancer. For those that have an increased risk of cancer, there may be ways to lower the risk.If breast cancer runs in your family. Certain DNA changes are linked to breast cancer. If these DNA changes run in your family, you might have an increased risk of breast cancer. DNA changes that increase the risk of male breast cancer include BRCA1 and BRCA2.If you know that a blood relative carries DNA changes linked to breast cancer, tell your doctor or other health care professional. Together you can decide whether you should have genetic testing to see if you also carry the DNA changes.If you carry a DNA change that increases your risk, you might need breast cancer screening. Usually this involves becoming familiar with the skin and tissue on your chest. Tell your health professional if you notice any changes. You also might have an annual exam of your chest.If you're a transgender man. If you haven't had gender-affirming surgery on your chest, talk with your doctor or other health care professional about breast cancer screening. In general, follow the screening guidelines for people assigned female at birth.If you've had gender-affirming surgery to your chest, breast cancer is still possible, though it's rare. Often a small amount of breast tissue remains after surgery. Get to know the look and feel of the skin on your chest. Report any changes to your health care team right away.Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Breast Cancer support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.189 Replies Tue, Jun 25, 2024 83 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 14 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Cancer that begins in the milk ducts, called ductal carcinoma.Cancer that begins in the milk-producing glands, called lobular carcinoma.Other types of cancer.Older age.Hormone therapy for prostate cancer or medicines containing estrogen.Family history of breast cancer.Inherited DNA changes that increase breast cancer risk.Klinefelter syndrome.Liver disease.Obesity.Testicle disease or surgery.If breast cancer runs in your family.If you're a transgender man.Advertising & Sponsorship