Marfan syndrome is an inherited disorder that affects connective tissue — the fibers that support and anchor your organs and other structures in your body. Marfan syndrome most commonly affects the heart, eyes, blood vessels and skeleton.People with Marfan syndrome are usually tall and thin with unusually long arms, legs, fingers and toes. The damage caused by Marfan syndrome can be mild or severe. If your aorta — the large blood vessel that carries blood from your heart to the rest of your body — is affected, the condition can become life-threatening.Treatment usually includes medications to keep your blood pressure low to reduce the strain on your aorta. Regular monitoring to check for damage progression is vital. Many people with Marfan syndrome eventually require preventive surgery to repair the aorta.People who have Marfan syndrome typically have especially long fingers. It's common for their thumbs to extend far beyond the edge of their hands when they make a fist.Marfan syndrome is a genetic disorder that causes people to have unusually long arms, legs and fingers. Your doctor may want to measure your arm span if he or she thinks you might have the disorder.The signs and symptoms of Marfan syndrome can vary greatly, even among members of the same family, because the disorder can affect so many different areas of the body. Some people experience only mild effects, but others develop life-threatening complications.Marfan syndrome features may include:If you think that you or your child may have Marfan syndrome, talk to your doctor or pediatrician. If your doctor suspects a problem, you'll likely be referred to a specialist for further evaluation.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesMarfan syndrome is caused by a defect in the gene that enables your body to produce a protein that helps give connective tissue its elasticity and strength.Most people with Marfan syndrome inherit the abnormal gene from a parent who has the disorder. Each child of an affected parent has a 50-50 chance of inheriting the defective gene. In about 25% of the people who have Marfan syndrome, the abnormal gene comes from neither parent. In these cases, a new mutation develops spontaneously.Marfan syndrome affects men and women equally and occurs among all races and ethnic groups. Because it's a genetic condition, the greatest risk factor for Marfan syndrome is having a parent with the disorder.The pressure of blood leaving your heart can cause the wall of your aorta to bulge out, like a weak spot in a tire. In people who have Marfan syndrome, this is most likely to happen at the aortic root — where the artery leaves your heart.An aortic aneurysm occurs when a weak spot in the wall of your aorta begins to bulge (left). This can occur anywhere in your aorta. Having an aneurysm increases the risk of an aortic dissection — a tear in the lining of the aorta, shown in the image on the right.Some people who have Marfan syndrome may experience the dislocation of the lens in their eye.Retinal detachment describes an emergency situation in which a thin layer of tissue (the retina) at the back of the eye pulls away from the layer of blood vessels that provides it with oxygen and nutrients. Retinal detachment is often accompanied by flashes and floaters in your vision.Viewed from the side, the typical spine takes the form of an elongated S, the upper back bowing outward and the lower back curving slightly inward. Viewed from behind though, the spine should appear as a straight line from the base of the neck to the tailbone. Scoliosis is a sideways curvature of the spine.Marfan syndrome can interfere with the normal development of the ribs, which can cause the breastbone to either protrude or appear sunken into the chest.Because Marfan syndrome can affect almost any part of your body, it may cause a wide variety of complications.The most dangerous complications of Marfan syndrome involve the heart and blood vessels. Faulty connective tissue can weaken the aorta — the large artery that arises from the heart and supplies blood to the body.Eye complications may include:Marfan syndrome increases the risk of abnormal curves in the spine, such as scoliosis. It can also interfere with the normal development of the ribs, which can cause the breastbone to either protrude or appear sunken into the chest. Foot pain and low back pain are common with Marfan syndrome.Marfan syndrome can weaken the walls of the aorta, the main artery that leaves the heart. During pregnancy, the heart pumps more blood than usual. This can put extra stress on the aorta, which increases the risk of a deadly dissection or rupture.Marfan syndrome care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Aortic Aneurysms support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.433 Replies Tue, Jun 11, 2024 501 Replies Mon, Jun 10, 2024 250 Replies Fri, May 24, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Aortic aneurysm.Aortic dissection.Valve malformations.Lens dislocation.Retinal problems.Early-onset glaucoma or cataracts.Advertising & Sponsorship