Medication overuse headaches — also known as rebound headaches — are caused by the long-term use of medicines to treat headaches such as migraines. Pain relievers offer relief for occasional headaches. But if you take them more than a couple of days a week, they may trigger headaches.If you have a headache disorder such as migraine, most medicines you take for pain relief can have this effect. However, this doesn't appear to be true for people who have never had a headache disorder. In people without a history of headaches, taking pain relievers regularly for another condition such as arthritis hasn't been shown to cause medication overuse headaches.Medication overuse headaches usually go away when you stop taking pain medicine. This can be challenging in the short term. But your health care provider can help you find ways to beat medication overuse headaches for the long-term.Symptoms of medication overuse headaches may vary. They can depend on the type of headache being treated and the medicine used. Medication overuse headaches tend to:Other symptoms may include:Occasional headaches are common. But it's important to take headaches seriously. Some types of headaches can be life-threatening.Seek immediate medical care if your headache:Consult your health care provider if:Experts don't yet know exactly why medication overuse headaches occur. The risk of developing them varies depending on the medicine. But most headache medicines have the potential to lead to medication overuse headaches, including:Combination pain relievers. Pain relievers you can buy at the store that combine caffeine, aspirin and acetaminophen (Excedrin, others) are common culprits.This group also includes combination prescription medicines that contain the sedative butalbital (Butapap, Lanorinal, others). Butalbital-containing medicines have an especially high risk of causing medication overuse headaches. It's best not to take them to treat headaches.Migraine medicines. Various migraine medicines have been linked with medication overuse headaches. They include triptans (Imitrex, Zomig, others) and certain headache medicines known as ergots, such as ergotamine (Ergomar). These medicines have a moderate risk of causing medication overuse headaches. The ergot dihydroergotamine (Migranal, Trudhesa) appears to have a lower risk of causing medication overuse headaches.A newer group of migraine medicines known as gepants don't appear to cause medication overuse headaches. Gepants include ubrogepant (Ubrelvy) and rimegepant (Nurtec ODT).Daily doses of caffeine also may fuel medication overuse headaches. Caffeine may come from coffee, soda, pain relievers and other products. Read product labels to make sure you're not getting more caffeine than you realize.Risk factors for developing medication overuse headaches include:To help prevent medication overuse headaches:Taking care of yourself can help prevent most headaches.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Seek immediate medical careConsult your health care providerSimple pain relievers.Combination pain relievers.Migraine medicines.Opioids.History of lifelong headaches.Regular use of headache medicines.History of substance use disorders.Avoid headache triggers.Get enough sleep.Don't skip meals.Stay hydrated.Exercise regularly.Reduce stress.Lose weight.Quit smoking.Advertising & Sponsorship