Melanoma is a kind of skin cancer that starts in the melanocytes. Melanocytes are cells that make the pigment that gives skin its color. The pigment is called melanin. This illustration shows melanoma cells extending from the surface of the skin into the deeper skin layers.Melanoma is a kind of skin cancer that starts in the melanocytes. Melanocytes are cells that make the pigment that gives skin its color. The pigment is called melanin.Melanoma typically starts on skin that's often exposed to the sun. This includes the skin on the arms, back, face and legs. Melanoma also can form in the eyes. Rarely, it can happen inside the body, such as in the nose or throat.The exact cause of all melanomas isn't clear. Most melanomas are caused by exposure to ultraviolet light. Ultraviolet light, also called UV light, comes from sunlight or tanning lamps and beds. Limiting exposure to UV light can help reduce the risk of melanoma.The risk of melanoma seems to be increasing in people under 40, especially women. Knowing the symptoms of skin cancer can help ensure that cancerous changes are detected and treated before the cancer has spread. Melanoma can be treated successfully if it is found early.Moles are usually harmless. They may contain hairs or become raised or wrinkled. Talk to your doctor about any change in the color or size of a mole or if itching, pain, bleeding or inflammation develops.The first sign of melanoma is often a mole that changes size, shape or color. This melanoma shows color variations and an irregular border, both of which are melanoma warning signs.The first melanoma signs and symptoms often are:Melanoma doesn't always begin as a mole. It also can happen on otherwise healthy skin.Melanomas symptoms can happen anywhere on the body. Melanomas most often develop in areas that have had exposure to the sun. This includes the arms, back, face and legs.Melanomas also can happen in areas that aren't as exposed to the sun. This includes the soles of the feet, palms of the hands and fingernail beds. Melanoma also can happen inside the body. These hidden melanomas are more common in people with brown or Black skin.Typical moles are generally a uniform color. They might look pink, tan, brown or black. In people with brown and Black skin, typical moles are more likely to be dark brown or black. Typical moles have a distinct border separating the mole from the surrounding skin. They're oval or round and usually smaller than 1/4 inch (about 6 millimeters) in diameter.Most moles begin appearing in childhood and new moles may form until about age 40. By the time they are adults, most people have between 10 and 40 moles. Moles may change in appearance over time and some may even go away with age.Some moles aren't typical. They may have certain characteristics that indicate melanomas or other skin cancers. Characteristics may include:Moles that become cancers can all look very different. Some may show all of the changes listed above, while others may have only one or two unusual characteristics.Melanomas also can develop in areas of the body that have little or no exposure to the sun. These areas may include the spaces between the toes and on the palms, soles, scalp or genitals. These are sometimes referred to as hidden melanomas because they occur in places most people wouldn't think to check. When melanoma occurs in people with brown or Black skin, it's more likely to occur in a hidden area.Hidden melanomas include:Make an appointment with your doctor or other healthcare professional if you notice any skin changes that worry you.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesSkin cancer begins in the cells that make up the outer layer of the skin, called the epidermis. One type of skin cancer called basal cell carcinoma begins in the basal cells. Basal cells make skin cells that keep pushing older cells toward the surface. As new cells move up, they become squamous cells. Skin cancer that starts in the squamous cells is called squamous cell carcinoma of the skin. Melanoma, another type of skin cancer, comes from the pigment cells, called melanocytes.Melanoma happens when something changes healthy melanocytes into cancer cells. Melanocytes are skin cells that make pigment that gives skin its color. The pigment is called melanin.Melanoma starts when melanocytes develop changes in their DNA. A cell's DNA holds the instructions that tell a cell what to do. In healthy cells, DNA gives instructions to grow and multiply at a set rate. The instructions tell the cells to die at a set time. In cancer cells, the DNA changes give different instructions. The changes tell the cancer cells to make many more cells quickly. Cancer cells can keep living when healthy cells would die. This causes too many cells.The cancer cells might form a mass called a tumor. The tumor can grow to invade and destroy healthy body tissue. In time, cancer cells can break away and spread to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads, it's called metastatic cancer.It isn't clear what changes the DNA in skin cells and how it leads to melanoma. It's likely a combination of factors, including environmental and genetic factors. Still, healthcare professionals believe exposure to ultraviolet light is the leading cause of melanoma. Ultraviolet light, also called UV light, comes from the sun and from tanning lamps and beds.UV light doesn't cause all melanomas, especially those that occur in places on your body that don't receive exposure to sunlight. This means that other factors may contribute to your risk of melanoma.Factors that may increase the risk of melanoma include:You can reduce your risk of melanoma and other types of skin cancer if you:Become familiar with your skin so that you'll notice changes. Check your skin often for new skin growths. Look for changes in existing moles, freckles, bumps and birthmarks. With the help of mirrors, check your face, neck, ears and scalp.Look at your chest and trunk and the tops and undersides of your arms and hands. Check both the front and back of your legs and your feet, including the soles and the spaces between your toes. Also check your genital area and between your buttocks.Wear protective clothing. When you go outside during the day, wear clothes that help protect your skin from the sun's rays. Cover your skin with dark, tightly woven clothing that covers your arms and legs. Wear a broad-brimmed hat, which provides more protection than does a baseball cap or visor. Some companies also sell protective clothing. A dermatologist can recommend an appropriate brand.Don't forget sunglasses. Look for those that block both types of UV light that come from the sun, called UVA and UVB.Melanoma care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Cancer support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.120 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 57 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 61 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Asymmetrical shape.Changes in color.Changes in size.Changes in symptoms.Unusual border.Melanoma inside the body.Melanoma in the eye.Melanoma under a nail.A family history of melanoma.A history of sunburn.Exposure to UV light.Having many moles or moles that aren't typical.Living closer to the equator or at a higher elevation.Skin that sunburns easily.Weakened immune system.Avoid tanning lamps and beds.Avoid the sun during the middle of the day.Become familiar with your skin so that you'll notice changes.Wear protective clothing.Wear sunscreen year-round.Advertising & Sponsorship