Three layers of membranes known as meninges protect the brain and spinal cord. The delicate inner layer is the pia mater. The middle layer is the arachnoid, a web-like structure filled with fluid that cushions the brain. The tough outer layer is called the dura mater.A meningioma is a tumor that grows from the membranes that surround the brain and spinal cord, called the meninges. A meningioma is not a brain tumor, but it may press on the nearby brain, nerves and vessels. Meningioma is the most common type of tumor that forms in the head.Most meningiomas grow very slowly. They can grow over many years without causing symptoms. But sometimes, their effects on nearby brain tissue, nerves or vessels may cause serious disability.Meningiomas occur more often in women. They're often found at older ages. But they can happen at any age.Because most meningiomas grow slowly, often without symptoms, they do not always need treatment right away. Instead, they may be watched over time.Symptoms of a meningioma most often begin slowly. They may be hard to notice at first. Symptoms may depend on where in the brain the meningioma is. Rarely, it can be in the spine.Symptoms may include:Most symptoms of a meningioma come on slowly. But sometimes a meningioma needs care right away.Seek emergency care if you have:Make an appointment to see your healthcare professional if you have lasting symptoms that worry you, such as headaches that get worse over time.Often, because meningiomas do not cause any symptoms you notice, they are found only from imaging scans done for other reasons.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and receive the latest on brain tumor treatment, diagnosis and surgery.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You will receive the first brain tumor email in your inbox shortly, which will include information on treatment, diagnosis, surgery and how brain cancer teams at Mayo Clinic approach personalized care.Please, try again in a couple of minutesIt isn't clear what causes a meningioma. Experts know that something changes some cells in the meninges. The changes makes them multiply out of control. This leads to a meningioma.Being exposed to radiation as a child is the only known environmental risk factor for getting meningioma. There's no good evidence to show that meningiomas happen because of cellphone use.Risk factors for a meningioma include:A meningioma and its treatment can cause long-term complications. Treatment most often involves surgery and radiation therapy. Complications may include:Your healthcare professional can treat some complications and refer you to specialists to help you cope with other complications.Meningioma care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Brain Tumor support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.172 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 1 Replies Tue, Jun 04, 2024 6 Replies Sun, May 26, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Seek emergency careMake an appointment to see your healthcare professionalRadiation treatment.Female hormones.An inherited nervous system condition.Obesity.Advertising & Sponsorship