Meningitis is an infection and inflammation of the fluid and membranes surrounding the brain and spinal cord. These membranes are called meninges.The inflammation from meningitis typically triggers symptoms such as headache, fever and a stiff neck.Most cases of meningitis in the United States are caused by a viral infection. But bacteria, parasites and fungi also can cause it. Some cases of meningitis improve without treatment in a few weeks. Others can cause death and require emergency antibiotic treatment.Seek immediate medical care if you suspect that you or someone in your family has meningitis. Early treatment of bacterial meningitis can prevent serious complications.Early meningitis symptoms may be similar to the flu. Symptoms may develop over several hours or over a few days.Possible symptoms in anyone older than the age of 2 years include:Newborns and infants may show these signs:Infants with meningitis may be hard to comfort. They may even cry harder when held.Seek immediate medical care if you or someone in your family has meningitis symptoms, such as:Bacterial meningitis is serious and can cause death within days without prompt antibiotic treatment. Delayed treatment also increases the risk of permanent brain damage.It's also important to talk to your health care provider if you've been exposed to someone with meningitis. That may include a family member or someone you live or work with. You may need to take medicines to prevent getting an infection.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesMeningitis is an infection and inflammation of the fluid and three membranes (meninges) protecting the brain and spinal cord. The tough outer membrane is called the dura mater, and the delicate inner layer is the pia mater.Viral infections are the most common cause of meningitis. That's followed by bacterial infections and, rarely, fungal and parasitic infections. Because bacterial infections can lead to death, learning the cause is essential.Bacteria that enter the bloodstream and travel to the brain and spinal cord cause bacterial meningitis. But bacterial meningitis also can occur when bacteria directly invade the meninges. This may be caused by an ear or sinus infection, a skull fracture, or — rarely — some surgeries.Several strains of bacteria can cause bacterial meningitis, most commonly:Neisseria meningitidis. This bacterium causes a bacterial meningitis called meningococcal meningitis. These bacteria commonly cause an upper respiratory infection but can cause meningococcal meningitis when they enter the bloodstream. This is a highly contagious infection that affects mainly teenagers and young adults. It may cause local epidemics in college dormitories, boarding schools and military bases.A vaccine can help prevent infection. Even if vaccinated, anybody who has been in close contact with a person with meningococcal meningitis should receive an oral antibiotic to prevent the disease.Viral meningitis is usually mild and often clears on its own. Most cases in the United States are caused by a group of viruses known as enteroviruses. They're most common in late summer and early fall. Viruses such as herpes simplex virus, HIV, mumps virus, West Nile virus and others also can cause viral meningitis.Chronic meningitis — one that's long-lasting — can be caused by slow-growing organisms such as fungi and Mycobacterium tuberculosis. They invade the membranes and fluid surrounding the brain. Chronic meningitis develops over two weeks or more. Symptoms are similar to acute meningitis, which is a sudden, new case. They include headache, fever, vomiting and mental cloudiness.Fungal meningitis isn't common in the United States. It may mimic acute bacterial meningitis. It's often contracted by breathing in fungal spores that may be found in soil, decaying wood and bird droppings.Fungal meningitis isn't spread from person to person. Cryptococcal meningitis is a common fungal form of the disease. It affects people with weakened immune systems, such as from AIDS. It can cause death if not treated with an antifungal medicine. Even with treatment, fungal meningitis may come back.Parasites can cause a rare type of meningitis called eosinophilic meningitis. Parasitic meningitis also can be caused by a tapeworm infection in the brain or cerebral malaria. Amoebic meningitis is a rare type that is sometimes contracted through swimming in fresh water and can quickly become life-threatening.The main parasites that cause meningitis typically infect animals. People are usually infected by eating foods contaminated with these parasites. Parasitic meningitis isn't spread between people.Meningitis also can result from noninfectious causes. They include chemical reactions, drug allergies, some types of cancer and inflammatory diseases such as sarcoidosis.Risk factors for meningitis include:Meningitis complications can be severe. The longer you or your child has the disease without treatment, the greater the risk of seizures and permanent neurological damage, including:With prompt treatment, even people with severe meningitis can have good recovery.Common bacteria or viruses that can cause meningitis can spread through coughing, sneezing, kissing, or sharing eating utensils, a toothbrush or a cigarette.These steps can help prevent meningitis:Some forms of bacterial meningitis are preventable with the following vaccinations:Meningococcal conjugate vaccine (MenACWY). The CDC recommends that a single dose be given to children ages 11 to 12, with a booster shot given at age 16. If the vaccine is first given between ages 13 and 15, the booster is recommended between ages 16 and 18. If the first shot is given at age 16 or older, no booster is necessary.This vaccine also can be given to children between the ages of 2 months and 10 years who are at high risk of bacterial meningitis or who have been exposed to someone with the disease. It's also used to vaccinate healthy but previously unvaccinated people who have been exposed in outbreaks.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Streptococcus pneumoniae.Neisseria meningitidis.Haemophilus influenzae.Listeria monocytogenes.Skipping vaccinations.Age.Living in a community setting.Pregnancy.Weakened immune system.Wash your hands.Practice good hygiene.Stay healthy.Cover your mouth.If you're pregnant, take care with food.Haemophilus influenzae type b vaccine (Hib).Pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV15 or PCV20).Pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV23).Meningococcal conjugate vaccine (MenACWY).Serogroup B meningococcal vaccine (MenB).Advertising & Sponsorship