Meniere's disease is an inner ear problem that can cause dizzy spells, also called vertigo, and hearing loss. Most of the time, Meniere's disease affects only one ear.Meniere's disease can happen at any age. But it usually starts between the ages of 40 to 60. It's thought to be a lifelong condition. But some treatments can help ease symptoms and lessen how it affects your life long term.Symptoms of Meniere's disease include:After a vertigo attack, symptoms get better and might go away for a while. Over time, how many vertigo attacks you have may lessen.See your healthcare provider if you have symptoms of Meniere's disease. Other illnesses can cause these problems. So, it's important to find out what's causing your symptoms as soon as possible.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesSemicircular canals and otolith organs — called the utricle and saccule — in your inner ear contain fluid and fine, hairlike sensors. These sensory hair cells help you keep your eyes focused on a target when your head is in motion. They also help you keep your balance.The cause of Meniere's disease isn't known. Symptoms of Meniere's disease may be due to extra fluid in the inner ear called endolymph. But it isn't clear what causes this fluid to build up in the inner ear.Issues that affect the fluid, which might lead to Meniere's disease, include:Because no single cause has been found, Meniere's disease likely has a combination of causes.Meniere's disease is most common in people ages 40 to 60. Females may have a slightly higher risk than men.You may have a higher chance of getting Meniere's disease if someone in your family has had the condition.You may have a higher risk of Meniere's disease if you have an autoimmune disorder.The most difficult complications of Meniere's disease can be:The disease can happen at any time. This can cause worry and stress.Vertigo can cause you to lose balance. This can increase your risk of falls and accidents.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Regular dizzy spells.Hearing loss.Ringing in the ear.Feeling of fullness in the ear.Advertising & Sponsorship