Meralgia paresthetica is a condition that causes tingling, numbness and burning pain in the outer part of the thigh. The condition is caused by compression of the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve, which supplies feeling to the upper leg.Meralgia paresthetica is a condition that causes tingling, numbness and burning pain in the outer thigh. It's caused by compression of the nerve that provides feeling to the skin covering the thigh. Meralgia paresthetica also is known as lateral femoral cutaneous nerve entrapment.Tight clothing, obesity or weight gain, and pregnancy are common causes of meralgia paresthetica. But meralgia paresthetica also can be due to an injury or a disease such as diabetes.Meralgia paresthetica often can be relieved with conservative measures, including wearing looser clothing. If symptoms aren't relieved by those measures, treatment may include medicines. Rarely, surgery is needed.Meralgia paresthetica may cause these symptoms in the outer part of the thigh:These symptoms commonly occur on one side of your body and might intensify after walking or standing.See your healthcare professional if you have symptoms of meralgia paresthetica.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesMeralgia paresthetica occurs when the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve is pinched, also known as compression. The nerve supplies feeling to the surface of the outer thigh. The nerve only affects sensation and doesn't impact your ability to use your leg muscles.In most people, this nerve passes through the groin to the upper thigh without trouble. But in meralgia paresthetica, the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve becomes trapped. Often the inguinal ligament pinches the nerve. This ligament runs along the groin from the stomach to the upper thigh.Common causes of this compression include any condition that increases pressure on the groin, including:Nerve injury also can cause meralgia paresthetica. Nerve injury can be due to diabetes, trauma after surgery or seat belt injury after a motor vehicle accident.The following might increase your risk of meralgia paresthetica:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Extra weight.Pregnancy.Diabetes.Age.Advertising & Sponsorship