The mesentery is a fold of membrane that attaches the intestine to the wall around the stomach area and holds it in place. Mesenteric lymphadenitis is swelling of the lymph nodes in the mesentery.Lymphadenitis is a condition in which the small round or bean-shaped clusters of cells, called lymph nodes, become swollen and inflamed. The swelling can affect the lymph nodes in the membrane that connects the bowel to the wall around the stomach area, called the mesentery. Then the condition is called mesenteric lymphadenitis (mez-un-TER-ik lim-fad-uh-NIE-tis).An infection in the intestines, such as a virus, is the usual cause of mesenteric lymphadenitis. Also called mesenteric adenitis, the condition mainly affects children and teens.Mesenteric lymphadenitis can act like appendicitis or a condition in which part of the intestine slides into another part of the intestine, called intussusception. Unlike appendicitis or intussusception, mesenteric lymphadenitis usually clears up on its own.Possible symptoms of mesenteric lymphadenitis include:Depending on what's causing the condition, symptoms also might include:Pain in the stomach area is common in children and teens. So it can be hard to know when to seek medical advice.Call a healthcare professional right away for a child who has:Also, call a healthcare provider for a child who has pain in the stomach area that doesn't get better in a short time and who also:The most common cause of mesenteric lymphadenitis is a viral infection, such as gastroenteritis. Gastroenteritis is often called stomach flu. This infection causes inflammation and swelling in the lymph nodes in the thin tissue that attaches the intestine to the back of the wall around the stomach area, called mesentery.Other causes of mesenteric lymphadenitis include bacterial infection, inflammatory bowel disease and lymphoma.Any infection that causes inflammation and swelling in the lymph nodes in the tissue that attaches the bowel to the abdominal wall increases the risk of mesenteric lymphadenitis.Conditions that raise the risk of mesenteric lymphadenitis include:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship