The colon is a long tube-like organ in the abdomen. It's the largest part of the large intestine. The colon carries waste to be expelled from the body. The rectum makes up the last several inches of the colon.Microscopic colitis is swelling and irritation, called inflammation, of the large intestine. This large intestine is also called the colon. Microscopic colitis causes symptoms of watery diarrhea.The condition gets its name from needing to look at colon tissue under a microscope to diagnose it. The tissue appears typical on exam with a colonoscopy or flexible sigmoidoscopy.There are two subtypes of microscopic colitis:Researchers believe collagenous (kuh-LAYJ-uh-nus) colitis and lymphocytic colitis may be forms of the same condition. Symptoms, testing and treatment are the same for both subtypes.Symptoms of microscopic colitis include:The symptoms of microscopic colitis can come and go. At times, symptoms improve on their own.If you have watery diarrhea that lasts more than a few days, contact your healthcare professional to diagnose and treat your condition.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care.If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.Please, try again in a couple of minutesIt's not clear what causes the swelling and irritation, called inflammation, of the colon found in microscopic colitis. Researchers believe that the causes may include:Risk factors for microscopic colitis include:Some research studies show a link between using certain medicines that may increase the risk of microscopic colitis. But not all studies agree.Medicines that may be linked to the condition include:There are minimal complications for most people once microscopic colitis is successfully treated. The condition does not increase the risk of colon cancer.Microscopic colitis care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Collagenous colitisLymphocytic colitisMedicinesBile acidBacteriaAutoimmune diseaseAge.Sex.Autoimmune disease.Genetic link.Smoking.Advertising & Sponsorship