Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is the stage between the expected decline in memory and thinking that happens with age and the more serious decline of dementia. MCI may include problems with memory, language or judgment.People with MCI may be aware that their memory or mental function has "slipped." Family and close friends also may notice changes. But these changes aren't bad enough to impact daily life or affect usual activities.MCI may increase the risk of dementia caused by Alzheimer's disease or other brain disorders. But some people with mild cognitive impairment might never get worse. And some eventually get better.The brain, like the rest of the body, changes with age. Many people notice they become more forgetful as they age. It may take longer to think of a word or to recall a person's name.If concerns with mental function go beyond what's expected, the symptoms may be due to mild cognitive impairment (MCI). MCI may be the cause of changes in thinking if:If you have MCI, you also may experience:Talk to your health care provider if you or someone close to you notices you're having problems with memory or thinking. This may include trouble recalling recent events or having trouble thinking clearly.Some changes in brain structure — such as the decrease in size of the brain's memory center (hippocampus) — are typical with aging. However, this reduction in size is greater in those with mild cognitive impairment and even more dramatic in people with Alzheimer's disease.Dementia causes the brain to lose mass, especially in critical areas. Note the difference in size between a healthy brain (top), a mild cognitive impairment brain (middle) and an Alzheimer's disease brain (bottom).There's no single cause of mild cognitive impairment (MCI), although MCI may be due to early Alzheimer's disease. There's no single outcome for the disorder. Symptoms of MCI may remain stable for years. Or MCI may progress to Alzheimer's disease dementia or another type of dementia. In some cases, MCI may improve over time.MCI often involves the same types of brain changes seen in Alzheimer's disease or other forms of dementia. In MCI, those changes occur at a lesser degree. Some of these changes have been seen in autopsy studies of people with MCI.These changes include:Brain-imaging studies show that the following changes may be associated with MCI:The strongest risk factors for MCI are:Other medical conditions and lifestyle factors have been linked to an increased risk of changes in thinking, including:People with MCI have an increased risk — but not a certainty — of developing dementia. Overall, about 1% to 3% of older adults develop dementia every year. Studies suggest that around 10% to 15% of people with MCI go on to develop dementia each year.Mild cognitive impairment can't be prevented. But research has found some lifestyle factors may lower the risk of getting MCI. Studies show that these steps may help prevent MCI:Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship