Mitral valve regurgitation is the most common type of heart valve disease. In this condition, the valve between the left heart chambers doesn't close fully. Blood leaks backward across the valve. If the leakage is severe, not enough blood moves through the heart or to the rest of the body. Mitral valve regurgitation can make you feel very tired or short of breath.Other names for mitral valve regurgitation are:Treatment of mitral valve regurgitation may include regular health checkups, medicines or surgery. You may not need treatment if the condition is mild.Severe mitral valve regurgitation often requires a catheter procedure or heart surgery to repair or replace the mitral valve. Without proper treatment, severe mitral valve regurgitation can cause heart rhythm problems or heart failure. The mitral valve is located between the upper left heart chamber (left atrium) and the lower left heart chamber (left ventricle). A healthy mitral valve keeps your blood moving in the right direction. A leaky valve doesn't close the way it should, allowing some blood to flow backward into the left atrium. If left untreated, a leaky valve could lead to heart failure.Mitral valve regurgitation is often mild and develops slowly. Some people do not have symptoms for many years.But sometimes, mitral valve regurgitation develops quickly. When this happens, it's called acute mitral valve regurgitation.Fatigue is a common but nonspecific symptom of mitral valve regurgitation. Other symptoms of mitral valve regurgitation include:If you have symptoms of mitral valve regurgitation, make an appointment for a health checkup.You may be referred to a doctor trained in heart diseases, called a cardiologist.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesA typical heart has two upper and two lower chambers. The upper chambers, the right and left atria, receive incoming blood. The lower chambers, the more muscular right and left ventricles, pump blood out of the heart. The heart valves help keep blood flowing in the right direction.To understand the causes of mitral valve disease, it may be helpful to know how the heart works.The mitral valve is one of four valves in the heart that keep blood flowing in the right direction. Each valve has flaps, also called leaflets, that open and close once during each heartbeat.In mitral valve regurgitation, the valve flaps don't close tightly. Blood moves backward when the valve is closed. This makes it harder for the heart to work properly.The mitral valve separates the two chambers of the left side of the heart. In mitral valve prolapse, the valve flaps bulge into the upper left chamber during each heartbeat. Mitral valve prolapse can cause blood to leak backward, a condition called mitral valve regurgitation.If mitral valve regurgitation is due to problems with the mitral valve, the condition is called primary mitral valve regurgitation.If a problem or disease affecting other areas of the heart cause a leaky mitral valve, the condition is called functional or secondary mitral regurgitation.Possible causes of mitral valve regurgitation include:Several things can increase the risk of mitral valve regurgitation, including:Mitral valve regurgitation complications often depend on the severity of disease. Mild mitral valve regurgitation usually does not cause any problems.As mitral valve regurgitation gets worse, the heart must work harder to pump blood to the body. The strain on the heart can cause the left lower chamber to widen. The heart muscle may become weak.Potential complications of severe mitral valve regurgitation include:Mitral valve regurgitation care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart & Blood Health support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.346 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 58 Replies Thu, Jun 20, 2024 106 Replies Wed, Jun 19, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Mitral valve prolapse.Rheumatic fever.Heart attack.Heart problem present at birth, also called a congenital heart defect.Thickening of the heart muscle, called cardiomyopathy. Damaged tissue cords.Inflammation of the inner lining of the heart's chambers and valves, called endocarditis.Radiation therapy.An irregular and often rapid heartbeat, called atrial fibrillation.High blood pressure in the lungs, called pulmonary hypertension.Congestive heart failure.Advertising & Sponsorship