The mitral valve separates the two chambers of the left side of the heart. In mitral valve prolapse, the valve flaps bulge into the upper left chamber during each heartbeat. Mitral valve prolapse can cause blood to leak backward, a condition called mitral valve regurgitation.Mitral valve stenosis, shown in the heart on the right, is a condition in which the heart's mitral valve is narrowed. The valve doesn't open properly, blocking blood flow coming into the left ventricle, the main pumping chamber of the heart. A typical heart is shown on the left.Mitral valve disease is a problem with the valve located between the left heart chambers. The upper left heart chamber is called the left atrium. The bottom left heart chamber is called the left ventricle.Mitral valve disease includes:Treatment for mitral valve disease depends on the severity of the condition and whether it is worsening. Sometimes, surgery is recommended to repair or replace the mitral valve.Some people with mitral valve disease might not have symptoms for many years, if at all.Symptoms of mitral valve disease can include:If you have symptoms of mitral valve disease, you may be referred to a doctor trained in heart diseases, called a cardiologist.A typical heart has two upper and two lower chambers. The upper chambers, the right and left atria, receive incoming blood. The lower chambers, the more muscular right and left ventricles, pump blood out of the heart. The heart valves help keep blood flowing in the right direction.To understand the causes of mitral valve disease, it may be helpful to know how the heart works.The mitral valve is one of four valves in the heart that keep blood flowing in the right direction. Each valve has flaps, called leaflets, that open and close once during each heartbeat. If a valve doesn't open or close properly, blood flow through the heart to the body can be reduced.Mitral valve disease has many causes. Some forms of mitral valve disease can be present at birth. A heart problem that you're born with is called a congenital heart defect.Mitral valve disease also may develop later in life. This means it is acquired. For example, mitral valve stenosis is often caused by rheumatic fever. This fever is a complication of a strep infection that can affect the heart. When this happens, it's called rheumatic mitral valve disease.Other causes of acquired mitral valve disease include:Several things can increase the risk of mitral valve disease, including:Mitral valve disease can cause many complications. Severe mitral valve regurgitation, for example, causes the heart to work harder, which can cause the left ventricle to enlarge and the heart muscle to weaken.Other complications of mitral valve disease may include:Mitral valve disease care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart & Blood Health support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.346 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 58 Replies Thu, Jun 20, 2024 106 Replies Wed, Jun 19, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Mitral valve regurgitation.Mitral valve stenosis.In mitral valve regurgitation,In mitral valve stenosis,Advertising & Sponsorship