Mitral valve stenosis, shown in the heart on the right, is a condition in which the heart's mitral valve is narrowed. The valve doesn't open properly, blocking blood flow coming into the left ventricle, the main pumping chamber of the heart. A typical heart is shown on the left.Mitral valve stenosis — sometimes called mitral stenosis — is a narrowing of the valve between the two left heart chambers. The narrowed valve reduces or blocks blood flow into the heart's main pumping chamber. The heart's main pumping chamber is the lower left heart chamber, also called the left ventricle.Mitral valve stenosis can make you tired and short of breath. Other symptoms may include irregular heartbeats, dizziness, chest pain or coughing up blood. Some people don't notice symptoms.Mitral valve stenosis can be caused by a complication of strep throat called rheumatic fever. Rheumatic fever is now rare in the United States.Treatment for mitral valve stenosis may include medication or mitral valve repair or replacement surgery. Some people only need regular health checkups. Treatment depends on the severity of the condition and whether it's getting worse. Untreated, mitral valve stenosis can lead to serious heart complications.Mitral valve stenosis usually worsens slowly. You may not have any symptoms, or you may have mild ones for many years. Symptoms of mitral valve stenosis can occur at any age — even during childhood.Symptoms of mitral valve stenosis include:Mitral valve stenosis symptoms may appear or get worse when the heart rate increases, such as during exercise. Anything that puts stress on the body, including pregnancy or infections, may trigger symptoms.Call your health care provider for an immediate appointment if you have chest pain, a fast, fluttering or pounding heartbeat, or shortness of breath during activity. Your provider might recommend that you visit a doctor trained in heart diseases. This type of care provider is called a cardiologist.If you have been diagnosed with mitral valve stenosis but haven't had symptoms, ask your provider about how often you should have follow-up exams.A typical heart has two upper and two lower chambers. The upper chambers, the right and left atria, receive incoming blood. The lower chambers, the more muscular right and left ventricles, pump blood out of the heart. The heart valves are gates at the chamber openings. They keep blood flowing in the right direction.To understand the causes of mitral valve disease, it may be helpful to know how the heart typically works.The mitral valve is one of four valves in the heart that keep blood flowing in the right direction. Each valve has flaps — called leaflets — that open and close once during each heartbeat. If a valve doesn't open or close properly, blood flow through the heart to the body can be reduced.In mitral valve stenosis, the valve opening narrows. The heart now must work harder to force blood through the smaller valve opening. Blood flow between the upper left and lower left heart chambers may decrease.Causes of mitral valve stenosis include:Risk factors for mitral valve stenosis include:Untreated, mitral valve stenosis can lead to complications such as:Rheumatic fever is the most common cause of mitral valve stenosis. So the best way to prevent mitral valve stenosis is to prevent rheumatic fever. You can do this by making sure you and your children see a health care provider for sore throats. Untreated strep throat infections can develop into rheumatic fever. Strep throat is usually easily treated with antibiotics.Mitral valve stenosis care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart & Blood Health support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.346 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 58 Replies Thu, Jun 20, 2024 106 Replies Wed, Jun 19, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Rheumatic fever.Calcium deposits.Radiation therapy.Heart problem present at birth, also called a congenital heart defect.Other health conditions.Untreated strep infections.Aging.Radiation therapy.Illegal drug use.Use of certain medicines.Irregular heartbeats.Blood clots.High blood pressure in the lung arteries.Right-sided heart failure.Advertising & Sponsorship