Moles can be brown, tan, black, blue, red or pink. They're often less than 1/4 inch (about 6 mm) in diameter — the size of a pencil eraser.Moles are usually harmless. They may contain hairs or become raised or wrinkled. Talk to your doctor about any change in the color or size of a mole or if itching, pain, bleeding or inflammation develops.Moles, also known as nevi, are a common type of skin growth. They often appear as small, dark brown spots that are caused by clusters of pigment-forming cells called melanocytes. Most people have 10 to 45 moles that appear during childhood and the teenage years. How these moles look may change over time. They also may fade over time.Most moles are harmless. Rarely, they become cancerous. Being aware of changes in your moles and other pigmented patches is important to finding skin cancer, especially malignant melanoma.The typical mole is a small brown spot. But moles come in different colors, shapes and sizes:Moles can grow anywhere on your body, including your scalp and armpits, as well as under your nails and between your fingers and toes. Most people have 10 to 45 moles. Many of these moles occur by age 40. Moles may change or fade away over time. They may become darker and larger with hormonal changes that occur during the teenage years and while pregnant.Clusters of brown spots around the eyes, cheeks and nose are dermatoses papulosa nigra — a type of seborrheic keratosis that is noncancerous and appears as waxy brown, black or tan growths. They aren't clusters of pigment-forming cells, known as nevi. Dermatoses papulosa nigra are more common among Black women. These lesions don't carry a risk of melanoma, but they can be treated as a cosmetic concern.A mole may be a sign of skin cancer if it has irregular borders or an asymmetrical shape, or if it changes in color, shape, size or height. This ABCDE guide can help you remember what to watch for: Cancerous moles, also known as malignant moles, vary greatly in how they look. Some may show all of the changes listed above. Others may have only one or two unusual traits.Make an appointment with your healthcare professional if a mole looks unusual, grows or otherwise changes. There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesMelanin is a natural pigment that gives your skin its color. It's produced in cells called melanocytes.Moles are caused when cells in the skin called melanocytes grow in clusters. Melanocytes generally are distributed throughout the skin. They produce melanin, the natural pigment that gives skin its color.Melanoma is the main complication of moles. Some people have an above-average risk of their moles becoming cancerous and leading to melanoma. Factors that raise melanoma risk include:The following measures can help limit the growth of moles and the main complication of moles: melanoma.Become familiar with the location and pattern of your moles. Regularly look at your skin for changes that may signal melanoma. Do self-exams of the skin monthly. With the help of mirrors, do a head-to-toe check, including:Talk with your healthcare professional about your risk factors for melanoma and whether you need a professional skin exam regularly.Take measures to protect your skin from ultraviolet (UV) radiation, such as from the sun or tanning beds. UV radiation has been linked to a higher melanoma risk. And children who haven't been protected from sun exposure tend to grow more moles.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Color and texture.Shape.Size.A is for asymmetrical shape.B is for border.C is for changes in color.D is for diameter.E is for evolving.Being born with large moles.Having unusual moles.Having many moles.Having a personal or family history of melanoma.Using tanning lamps or beds.Stay out of the sun during peak times.Use sunscreen year-round.Wear protective clothing.Don't use tanning lamps or beds.Advertising & Sponsorship