Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) is a condition in which an atypical protein is found in the blood. The protein is called monoclonal protein or M protein.This protein is made in the soft, blood-producing tissue in the center of bones. This blood-producing tissue is bone marrow. Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance occurs most often in older men.MGUS usually causes no problems. But sometimes it can lead to more-serious diseases. These include some forms of blood cancer.People who have high amounts of this protein in the blood need regular checkups. That's so they can get earlier treatment if the condition gets worse. If it doesn't get worse, MGUS doesn't need treatment.People with monoclonal gammopathy often don't have symptoms. Some people have a rash or nerve problems, such as numbness or tingling. A blood test for another condition might find MGUS by chance.Experts don't know what causes MGUS. Changes in genes and being around certain chemicals, such as those used to kill pests, appear to play a role.Factors that increase your risk of developing MGUS include:Each year, about 1% of people with MGUS get certain types of blood cancers or other serious diseases, such as:Other issues linked to MGUS include broken bones, blood clots, kidney problems, and damage to nerves outside of the brain and spinal cord, also known as peripheral neuropathy.Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Blood Cancers & Disorders support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.53 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 60 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 107 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Age.Race.Sex.Family history.Advertising & Sponsorship