Mood disorders, such as depression and bipolar disorder, affect people emotionally. If you have depression, you may constantly feel sad. You also may be anxious. If you have bipolar disorder, you'll likely have extreme mood swings. Your feelings may range from being very sad, empty or cranky to being very happy — going back and forth between each mood. Mood disorders are more common in women.Having a mood disorder may raise your risk of suicide. This risk is higher if the mood disorder is serious and you also have problems with alcohol or drugs.If you're thinking about suicide, contact a hotline for help. In the U.S., call or text 988 to reach the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline. It's available 24 hours a day, every day. Or use the Lifeline Chat. Services are free and private. The Suicide & Crisis Lifeline in the U.S. has a Spanish-language phone line at 1-888-628-9454 (toll-free).Mood disorders are divided into two major groups: depressive disorders and bipolar disorders. Each group includes several different types.Depressive disorders cause loss of pleasure in most or all activities and ultimately affect your quality of life. You could have less energy, trouble sleeping, trouble concentrating, changes in appetite and lack interest. You also could have feelings of worthlessness or guilt and be in pain and tired.Types of depressive disorders include:Bipolar disorders feature mood swings that include emotional highs called manic or hypomanic episodes, and lows, called depressive episodes. These highs and lows are usually continuous. But they also can change from high to low or low to high — or shift into a normal mood. Sometimes both the highs and lows might occur together. This is called a mixed episode. You could be easily distracted and have racing thoughts. Your sleep also could be affected.Types include:Symptoms depend on the type of mood disorder.Depressive disorders are common and often long-lasting. They can:Bipolar disorders may feature:You also could be easily distracted and more likely to think about suicide or plan for suicide, depending on the seriousness of symptoms.Other types of mood disorders may include other symptoms.If you're concerned that you may have a mood disorder, see your doctor or a mental health professional as soon as you can. If you're not sure you want to seek treatment, talk to a friend or loved one, a faith leader, or someone else you trust.Talk to a health care professional if you:Your mood disorder is not likely to go away on its own. And it may get worse over time. Get professional help before your mood disorder becomes serious. It may be easier to treat early on.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesMood disorders are caused by traits passed down to you, as well as environmental factors and life events. Environmental factors can include, for example, childhood experiences and stressful life events. Some prescription drugs, such as corticosteroids and medicines for Parkinson's disease, and street drugs also can cause mood disorders.Risk factors include life experiences and stressful life events that increase the risk of certain types of mood disorders.Mood disorders may occur along with neurological disorders. These are conditions that affect the brain and the nervous system. For example, depression is common among people with multiple sclerosis, dementia, traumatic brain injury, stroke and epilepsy. Depression also often occurs in people who have movements disorders like Parkinson's disease and those who have other long-term health conditions.Mood disorders care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Major depressionSeasonal affective disorderPersistent depressive disorderDisruptive mood dysregulation disorderPremenstrual dysphoric disorderDepression related to a medical conditionDepression related to substance or medicine useBipolar I disorderBipolar II disorderCyclothymiaBipolar related to a medical conditionBipolar related to the use of certain substancesAdvertising & Sponsorship