Mosquito bites are the itchy bumps that form on the skin after mosquitoes feed on your blood. The bumps usually go away without treatment in a few days. Some mosquito bites may get very swollen, sore and inflamed. This type of reaction, sometimes called skeeter syndrome, is most common in children.Mosquito bites can cause severe illnesses if the insects carry certain viruses or parasites. Infected mosquitoes can spread West Nile virus, Zika virus, and the viruses that cause malaria, yellow fever and some types of brain infection.Mosquito bites often happen on parts of the body that aren't covered by clothing. Symptoms include:A severe reaction to mosquito bites can cause:Children are more likely to have a severe reaction than are adults.Contact your health care provider if the mosquito bites seem to occur with warning signs of a serious condition. These might include a high fever, severe headache, body aches and signs of infection.Mosquito bites are caused by female mosquitoes feeding on your blood. As a biting mosquito fills itself with blood, it injects saliva into your skin. The saliva triggers an immune system reaction that results in the classic itching and bump.Mosquitoes are attracted to smells, such as from sweat, floral scents and exhaled carbon dioxide.Scratching bites can lead to infection.Mosquitoes can carry the viruses that cause certain diseases, such as West Nile virus and the viruses that cause malaria, yellow fever and dengue fever. The mosquito gets a virus or parasite by biting an infected person or animal. Then when it's biting you, the mosquito can transfer that virus or parasite to you through its saliva. West Nile, dengue fever and some types of encephalitis occur in the United States. Other diseases, such as malaria and yellow fever, are far more common in tropical areas of the world.Mosquitos bite during both day and night, and they can live indoors. You can take several steps to protect yourself from mosquito bites.Limit exposure to mosquitoes by:Use insect repellent when mosquitoes are active. The most effective insect repellents in the United States include one of these active ingredients:These ingredients temporarily repel mosquitoes and ticks. DEET may offer longer lasting protection. Whichever product you choose, read the label before you apply it. If you're using a spray repellent, apply it outdoors and away from food. You may need to reapply it 6 to 8 hours later if you're still in an area where mosquitoes are active.If you're also using sunscreen, put it on first, about 20 minutes before applying the repellent. Avoid products that have both sunscreen and repellent, because you'll likely need to reapply sunscreen more often than repellent. And it's best to use only as much repellent as you need and to wash your hands after applying it.Used according to package directions, these products are generally safe for children and adults, with a few exceptions:Permethrin is an insecticide and insect repellent used for added protection. This product is made to use on clothing and outdoor gear, not skin. Check the product label for instructions. Some sporting goods stores sell clothing pretreated with permethrin. Don't wash bed nets or set them in sunlight, as this breaks down permethrin. Clothing sprayed with permethrin can offer protection for two washings and up to two weeks.Weather permitting, wear a hat, long-sleeved shirts and long pants.Get vaccinations or take preventive medicine that your health care provider has suggested.Think about whether you tend to have large or severe reactions to mosquito bites — skeeter syndrome. You might want to take a nondrowsy, nonprescription antihistamine when you know you'll be exposed to mosquitoes.Get rid of standing water, which mosquitoes need to breed. Take these steps to keep your house and yard free of mosquito pools:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship