Learn more about mouth cancer, also called oral cancer, from oncologist Katharine Price, M.D.Hello, I'm Dr. Katharine Price, an oncologist at Mayo Clinic. In this video, we'll cover the basics of oral cancer: What is it? Who gets it? The symptoms, diagnosis and treatment. Whether you're looking for answers for yourself or someone you love, we're here to give you the best information available. Oral cancer, also called mouth cancer, forms in the oral cavity, which includes all parts of your mouth that you can see if you open wide and look in the mirror. Your lips, gums, tongue, cheeks, roof or floor of the mouth. Oral cancer forms when cells on the lips or in the mouth mutate. Most often they begin in the flat, thin cells that line your lips and the inside of your mouth. These are called squamous cells. Small changes to the DNA of the squamous cells make the cells grow abnormally. These mutated cells accumulate, forming a tumor that grows in the mouth and often spread to lymph nodes in the neck. Oral cancer is curable if detected at an early stage. And like other cancers, a large amount of effort has been dedicated to determining causes and improving treatments.The average age of those diagnosed with oral cancer is 63. Just over 20% of cases occur in patients younger than 55. However, it can affect anyone. There are several known risk factors that could increase your risk of developing oral cancer. If you use any kind of tobacco, cigarettes, cigars, pipes, chewing tobacco, and others, you're at a greater risk. Heavy alcohol use also increases the risk. Those with HPV, human papillomavirus, have a higher chance of developing oral cancer as well. Other risk factors include a diet that lacks fruit and vegetables, chronic irritation or inflammation in the mouth, and a weakened immune system.Oral cancer can present itself in many different ways, which could include: a lip or mouth sore that doesn't heal, a white or reddish patch on the inside of your mouth, loose teeth, a growth or lump inside your mouth, mouth pain, ear pain, and difficulty or pain while swallowing, opening your mouth or chewing. If you're experiencing any of these issues and they persist for more than two weeks, see a doctor. They'll be able to rule out more common causes first, like an infection.To determine if you have oral cancer, your doctor or dentist will usually perform a physical exam to inspect any areas of irritation such as sores or white patches. If they suspect something is abnormal, they may conduct a biopsy where they take a small sample of the area for testing. If oral cancer is diagnosed, your medical team will then determine how far along the cancer is, or the stage of the cancer. The stage of the cancer ranges from 0 to 4 and helps your doctor counsel you on the likelihood of successful treatment. In order to determine the stage, they may perform an endoscopy, where doctors use a small camera to inspect your throat, or they may order imaging tests, like CT scans, PET scans, and MRIs, to gather more information.What your treatment plan looks like will depend on your cancer's location and stage, as well as your health and personal preferences. You may have just one type of treatment or you may need a combination of cancer treatments. Surgery is the main treatment for oral cancer. Surgery generally means removing the tumor and possibly lymph nodes in the neck. If the tumor is large, reconstruction may be required. If the tumor is small and there's no evidence of spread to lymph nodes, surgery alone may be enough treatment. If the oral cancer has spread to lymph nodes in the neck or is large and invading different areas of the mouth, more treatment is required after surgery. This could include radiation, which uses high-power beams of energy to target and destroy the mutated cancerous cells. Sometimes chemotherapy is combined with the radiation. Chemotherapy is a powerful cocktail of chemicals that kills the cancer. Immunotherapy, a newer treatment which helps your immune system attack the cancer, is also sometimes used.Learning you have oral cancer can be difficult. It can leave you feeling helpless. But remember, information is power when it comes to your health. This disease is survivable - now more than ever. Be informed. Take control of your health. And partner with your medical team to find a treatment that's right for you. If you'd like to learn even more about mouth cancer, watch our other related videos or visit mayoclinic.org. We wish you well.Lip cancer may appear as a sore on your lip that doesn't heal.Mouth cancer signs may include bleeding, swelling, white patches or redness in your mouth.Mouth cancer signs may include red sores that don't heal.Mouth cancer refers to cancer that develops in any of the parts that make up the mouth (oral cavity). Mouth cancer can occur on the:Cancer that occurs on the inside of the mouth is sometimes called oral cancer or oral cavity cancer.Mouth cancer is one of several types of cancers grouped in a category called head and neck cancers. Mouth cancer and other head and neck cancers are often treated similarly.Signs and symptoms of mouth cancer may include:Make an appointment with your doctor or dentist if you have any persistent signs and symptoms that bother you and last more than two weeks. Your doctor will likely investigate other more common causes for your signs and symptoms first, such as an infection.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Subscribe for free and receive an in-depth guide to coping with cancer, plus helpful information on how to get a second opinion. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview.ErrorSelect a topicErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.Your in-depth coping with cancer guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest about cancer news, research, and care.If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.Please, try again in a couple of minutesMouth cancers form when cells on the lips or in the mouth develop changes (mutations) in their DNA. A cell's DNA contains the instructions that tell a cell what to do. The mutations changes tell the cells to continue growing and dividing when healthy cells would die. The accumulating abnormal mouth cancer cells can form a tumor. With time they may spread inside the mouth and on to other areas of the head and neck or other parts of the body.Mouth cancers most commonly begin in the flat, thin cells (squamous cells) that line your lips and the inside of your mouth. Most oral cancers are squamous cell carcinomas.It's not clear what causes the mutations in squamous cells that lead to mouth cancer. But doctors have identified factors that may increase the risk of mouth cancer.Factors that can increase your risk of mouth cancer include:There's no proven way to prevent mouth cancer. However, you can reduce your risk of mouth cancer if you:Mouth cancer care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Head & Neck Cancer support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.37 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 9 Replies Fri, Jun 07, 2024 69 Replies Fri, Jun 07, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Stop using tobacco or don't start.Drink alcohol only in moderation, if at all.Avoid excessive sun exposure to your lips.See your dentist regularly.Advertising & Sponsorship