Multiple system atrophy (MSA) is a rare, degenerative neurological disorder affecting your body's involuntary (autonomic) functions, including blood pressure, and motor control.MSA was formerly called Shy-Drager syndrome, olivopontocerebellar atrophy or striatonigral degeneration. MSA shares many symptoms with Parkinson's disease, such as slow movement, rigid muscles and poor balance.Treatment includes medications and lifestyle changes to help manage symptoms, but there is no cure. The condition progresses gradually and eventually leads to death.Multiple system atrophy (MSA) affects many parts of your body. Symptoms usually start in adulthood, usually in the 50s or 60s.There are two types of MSA: parkinsonian and cerebellar. The type depends on the symptoms you have when you're diagnosed.This is the most common type of MSA. The signs and symptoms are similar to those of Parkinson's disease, such as:The main signs and symptoms are problems with muscle coordination (ataxia), but others may include:In addition, the primary sign of multiple system atrophy is autonomic failure, which may cause problems with body functions you can't control. This may include:Postural hypotension is a form of low blood pressure that makes you feel dizzy or lightheaded, or even faint, when you stand up from sitting or lying down. Not everyone with MSA has postural hypotension.You can also develop dangerously high blood pressure levels while lying down (supine hypertension).If you develop any of the signs and symptoms associated with multiple system atrophy, see your doctor for an evaluation and diagnosis. If you've already been diagnosed with the condition, contact your doctor if new symptoms occur or if existing symptoms worsen.There's no known cause for multiple system atrophy (MSA). Some researchers are studying a possible inherited component or involvement of an environmental toxin in the disease process, but there's no substantial evidence to support these theories.MSA causes deterioration and shrinkage (atrophy) of portions of your brain (cerebellum, basal ganglia and brainstem) that affect internal body functions and motor control.Under a microscope, the damaged brain tissue of people with MSA shows nerve cells (neurons) that contain an unusual amount of a protein called alpha-synuclein. Some research suggests that there may be too much buildup of this protein in multiple system atrophy.The progression of MSA varies, but the condition does not go into remission. As the disorder progresses, daily activities become more difficult.Possible complications include:People typically live about 7 to 10 years after multiple system atrophy symptoms first appear. However, the survival rate with MSA varies widely. Death is often due to respiratory problems, infections or blood clots in the lungs (pulmonary embolus).Multiple system atrophy (MSA) care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship