Mumps is an illness caused by a virus. It usually affects the glands on each side of the face. These glands, called parotid glands, make saliva. Swollen glands may be tender or painful. There are three pairs of major salivary glands — parotid, sublingual and submandibular. Each gland has its own tube (duct) leading from the gland to the mouth. Mumps are not common in the United States because of vaccines. But outbreaks do happen. People who are not vaccinated are at high risk of infection. Vaccinated people who get mumps usually have milder symptoms and fewer complications.There is no specific medicine for mumps. Treatment relieves pain and discomfort.Symptoms of mumps show up about 2 to 3 weeks after exposure to the virus. Some people may have no symptoms or very mild symptoms.The first symptoms may be similar to flu symptoms such as:Swelling of the salivary glands usually starts within a few days. Symptoms may include: A common symptom of mumps is painful swelling on one or both sides of the face. See your health care provider if you or your child has symptoms of mumps. Mumps spreads very easily for about five days after the swelling starts. If you think you have mumps, let the clinic know before you go. The clinic staff likely will take steps to prevent the spread of disease.Other conditions may have similar symptoms, so it's important to get a quick diagnosis.If you think your child has mumps, call your care provider if your child develops:In the meantime:Mumps is caused by a type of germ called a virus. When someone has mumps, the virus is in saliva. Coughing or sneezing can release tiny droplets with the virus into the air.You can get the virus by breathing in tiny droplets. Or you can get the virus by touching a surface where droplets have landed and then touching your face. You also can pick up the virus from direct contact, such as kissing or sharing a water bottle.Outbreaks in the United States most often happen where people live or work in close contact. These may include college campuses, summer camps and schools.Complications of mumps are more likely among people who aren't vaccinated. They can happen even if a person didn't have swollen salivary glands.Complications happen when the virus reaches other tissues in the body. Complications may include:Most people who have had the mumps vaccines, called fully vaccinated, are protected from mumps infections. People who aren't vaccinated are more likely to get mumps.For some people, vaccine protection may go down over time. When fully vaccinated people get mumps, they usually have milder symptoms and fewer complications.The mumps vaccine is a part of the recommended childhood vaccinations. It's usually given as a combined measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) vaccine. The schedule is:Another version of measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) includes the vaccine against the virus that causes chickenpox, called varicella-zoster virus. But that vaccine, called the measles-mumps-rubella-varicella vaccine (MMRV) is not used for the first dose in the standard vaccination schedule for children.Extensive studies in several countries have shown that there is no link between the MMR or measles-mumps-rubella-varicella (MMRV) vaccines and autism. The original study that suggested this connection in 1998 was based on scientific errors. That study was removed from the scientific record in 2010.Extensive reports from the American Academy of Pediatrics, the National Academy of Medicine, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention conclude that there is no scientifically proven link between the MMR vaccine and autism.If you haven't had two doses or aren't sure, talk to your health care provider. You may need two doses of the vaccine or a booster. This is especially important if you are in a high-risk setting or in an outbreak. The following people may need proof of vaccination or more doses:If you're not sure if you're vaccinated, a blood test can show whether you have antibodies to mumps. If you have antibodies to the virus, then your immune system would fight a mumps infection and you don't need another vaccine.People who were born before 1957 were likely exposed to the virus. They likely are immune to mumps.The mumps vaccine is made from a weak but still infectious mumps virus. A typical immune system can handle this weak virus easily. But people with immune systems that won't respond quickly or strongly to the vaccine don't usually get this vaccine. But there are some exceptions if the benefits outweigh the risks. Also, this type of vaccine is not suggested for people who are pregnant.The MMR vaccine is safe and effective. Most people have no side effects.If they happen, mild side effects may include:In rare cases, some people may have symptoms such as pain and stiffness in joints, seizures, short-term drop in blood platelets or a rash.Severe allergic reactions are rare. People who have a severe allergic reaction to the first dose aren't given a second dose. Also, people won't get the vaccine if they've had a severe allergic reaction to an ingredient in the vaccine.Nov 23, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.