Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) is a complicated disorder.It causes extreme fatigue that lasts for at least six months. Symptoms worsen with physical or mental activity but don't fully improve with rest.The cause of ME/CFS is unknown, although there are many theories. Experts believe it might be triggered by a combination of factors. There's no single test to confirm a diagnosis. You may need a variety of medical tests to rule out other health problems that have similar symptoms. Treatment for the condition focuses on easing symptoms.Symptoms of ME/CFS can vary from person to person, and the severity of symptoms can fluctuate from day to day. In addition to fatigue, symptoms may include:Some people with this condition have headaches, sore throats, and tender lymph nodes in the neck or armpits. People with the condition also may become extra sensitive to light, sound, smells, food and medicines.Fatigue can be a symptom of many illnesses. In general, see your doctor if you have persistent or excessive fatigue.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe cause of myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) is still unknown. A combination of factors may be involved, including:Factors that may increase your risk of ME/CFS include:Symptoms of ME/CFS can come and go, and often are triggered by physical activity or emotional stress. This can make it difficult for people to maintain a regular work schedule or to even take care of themselves at home.Many people may be too weak to get out of bed at different points during their illness. Some may need to use a wheelchair.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Genetics.Infections.Physical or emotional trauma.Problems with energy usage.Age.Sex.Other medical problems.Advertising & Sponsorship