Myelofibrosis is an uncommon type of bone marrow cancer that disrupts your body's normal production of blood cells.Myelofibrosis causes extensive scarring in your bone marrow, leading to severe anemia that can cause weakness and fatigue. Bone marrow scarring can also cause you to have a low number of blood-clotting cells called platelets, which increases the risk of bleeding. Myelofibrosis often causes an enlarged spleen.Myelofibrosis is considered to be a chronic leukemia — a cancer that affects the blood-forming tissues in the body. Myelofibrosis belongs to a group of diseases called myeloproliferative disorders.Myelofibrosis can happen on its own (primary myelofibrosis) or it can develop from another bone marrow disorder (secondary myelofibrosis).Some people with myelofibrosis have no symptoms and might not need treatment right away. Others with more-serious forms of the disease might need aggressive treatments right away. Treatment for myelofibrosis, which focuses on relieving symptoms, can involve a variety of options.Myelofibrosis usually develops slowly. In its very early stages, many people don't experience signs or symptoms.As disruption of normal blood cell production increases, signs and symptoms may include:Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs and symptoms that worry you.Myelofibrosis occurs when bone marrow stem cells develop changes (mutations) in their DNA. The stem cells have the ability to replicate and divide into the multiple specialized cells that make up your blood — red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets.It's not clear what causes the genetic mutations in bone marrow stem cells.As the mutated blood stem cells replicate and divide, they pass along the mutations to the new cells. As more and more of these mutated cells are created, they begin to have serious effects on blood production.The end result is usually a lack of red blood cells — which causes the anemia characteristic of myelofibrosis — and an overabundance of white blood cells and varying levels of platelets. In people with myelofibrosis, the normally spongy bone marrow becomes scarred.Several specific gene mutations have been identified in people with myelofibrosis. The most common is the Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) gene mutation. Other less common mutations include CALR and MPL. Some people with myelofibrosis don't have any identifiable gene mutations. Knowing whether these gene mutations are associated with your myelofibrosis helps determine your prognosis and your treatment.Although the cause of myelofibrosis often isn't known, certain factors are known to increase your risk:Complications that may result from myelofibrosis include:Myelofibrosis care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Blood Cancers & Disorders support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.53 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 60 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 107 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Age.Another blood cell disorder.Exposure to certain chemicals.Exposure to radiation.Increased pressure on blood flowing into your liver.Pain.Growths in other areas of your body.Bleeding complications.Acute leukemia.Advertising & Sponsorship