Myocarditis is inflammation of the heart muscle. This illustration shows typical heart muscle compared with damaged heart muscle due to inflammation.Myocarditis is inflammation of the heart muscle, called the myocardium. The condition can reduce the heart's ability to pump blood. Myocarditis can cause chest pain, shortness of breath, and rapid or irregular heartbeats.Infection with a virus is one cause of myocarditis. Sometimes myocarditis is caused by a medicine reaction or a condition that causes inflammation throughout the body.Severe myocarditis weakens the heart so that the rest of the body doesn't get enough blood. Clots can form in the heart, leading to a stroke or heart attack.Treatment for myocarditis may include medicines, procedures or surgeries.Some people with early myocarditis don't have symptoms. Others have mild symptoms.Common myocarditis symptoms include:Sometimes, myocarditis symptoms are like symptoms of a heart attack. If you are having unexplained chest pain and shortness of breath, seek emergency medical help.When children get myocarditis, symptoms may include:Contact a healthcare professional if you have symptoms of myocarditis. Symptoms of myocarditis can seem like a heart attack. Get emergency medical help if you have unexplained chest pain, rapid heartbeats or shortness of breath.If you have severe symptoms, go to the emergency room or call for emergency medical help.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesInfections can cause myocarditis.Viruses. Many viruses have been linked to myocarditis, including the adenovirus, which causes the common cold; the COVID-19 virus; viruses that cause hepatitis B and C; parvovirus, which causes a mild rash, usually in children; and herpes simplex virus.Gastrointestinal infections due to echoviruses, Epstein-Barr virus, which causes mononucleosis, and German measles, also called rubella, all can cause myocarditis. Myocarditis also can be caused by HIV, the virus that causes AIDS.Myocarditis also may be caused by:Often, the cause of myocarditis isn't found.Usually, myocarditis goes away without complications. However, severe myocarditis can permanently damage the heart muscle.Possible complications of myocarditis may include:There's no specific prevention for myocarditis. However, taking these steps to prevent infections might help:Myocarditis care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart & Blood Health support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.346 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 58 Replies Thu, Jun 20, 2024 106 Replies Wed, Jun 19, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Viruses.Bacteria.Parasites.Fungi.Certain medicines or illegal drugs.Chemicals or radiation.Other health conditions.Heart failure.Heart attack or stroke.Rapid or irregular heartbeats, called arrhythmias.Sudden cardiac death.Stay away from people who are sick.Wash your hands regularly.Avoid risky behaviors.Get recommended vaccines.Advertising & Sponsorship