Myoclonus refers to a quick jerking movement that you can't control. Hiccups are a form of myoclonus, as are the sudden jerks or "sleep starts" that you may feel just before falling asleep. These forms of myoclonus occur in healthy people and usually aren't serious.Other forms of myoclonus may occur because of a nervous system disorder, such as epilepsy, a metabolic condition, or a reaction to a medicine.Treating whatever condition causes myoclonus can help control symptoms. Sometimes the cause of myoclonus is unknown or can't be specifically treated. In these cases, the goal of treatment is to reduce the effects of myoclonus on quality of life.People with myoclonus often describe their symptoms as jerks, shakes or spasms that are:If your myoclonus symptoms become frequent and persistent, talk to your health care provider about a diagnosis and treatment options.Myoclonus may be caused by a variety of underlying problems. It is commonly separated into different types based on what is causing it. The cause can help determine treatment.This type of myoclonus occurs in healthy people and rarely needs treatment. Examples include:Essential myoclonus occurs on its own, usually without other symptoms and without being related to any underlying illness. The cause of essential myoclonus is often unknown. In some cases, the cause is hereditary, meaning passed down in families.This type of myoclonus occurs as part of an epileptic disorder.Symptomatic myoclonus results from an underlying medical condition. It is sometimes called secondary myoclonus. Examples include:Nervous system conditions that result in secondary myoclonus include:Myoclonus care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship