Myofascial pain syndrome is a long-term pain condition. It involves some muscles and the thin cover of tissue that holds muscles in place, called fascia. Pressure on these areas, called trigger points, causes pain.Sometimes, the pain is felt in other parts of the body. This is called referred pain. The pain often is felt as shoulder pain, back pain, tension headaches and face pain.This syndrome can happen after a muscle has been tensed over and over. Repeated motions used in jobs or hobbies can be the cause. So can stress-related muscle tension, poor posture and weak muscles. In some cases, the cause of myofascial pain is unknown.Almost everyone has felt muscle tension pain. But the pain of myofascial pain syndrome doesn't go away. Treatment options include exercise, massage, physical therapy and shots in the trigger points. Pain medicines and finding ways to relax also can help.Symptoms of myofascial pain syndrome may include:Most people have muscle pain at times. But if your muscle pain doesn't go away with rest, massage and other self-care measures, make an appointment with your healthcare professional.The exact cause of myofascial pain syndrome is not known. Areas of tight muscle fibers, called trigger points, form in muscles. Too much use of the muscles, most often with poor form, injury to the muscle and mental stress likely help cause trigger points.In myofascial pain syndrome, something such as muscle tightness sets off trigger points in the muscles. Factors that may increase the risk of muscle trigger points include:Complications linked to myofascial pain syndrome include:Fibromyalgia. Some research suggests that myofascial pain syndrome may lead to fibromyalgia in some people. Fibromyalgia is a long-term condition of widespread pain.It's believed that the brains of people with fibromyalgia respond more to pain signals over time. Some experts believe myofascial pain syndrome might help start this process.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Muscle injury.Stress and anxiety.Sleep problems.Fibromyalgia.Advertising & Sponsorship