Myxofibrosarcoma (MFS) is a type of cancer that begins in the connective tissue. It tends to happen in the arms and legs.MFS starts as a growth of cells that can grow into healthy body tissue. MFS might cause a lump under the skin that grows slowly. It often isn't painful. MFS happens most often in adults over 50.MFS is one of many types of cancer that start in the connective tissues that support and surround the organs, bones and muscles. Doctors sometimes call these cancers soft tissue sarcomas.Doctors are still learning about what makes MFS different from other types of soft tissue sarcoma. Sometimes it looks like a growth that isn't cancer. This can make it hard to get a correct diagnosis and prompt treatment to control the cancer.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Subscribe for free and receive an in-depth guide to coping with cancer, plus helpful information on how to get a second opinion. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview.ErrorSelect a topicErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.Your in-depth coping with cancer guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest about cancer news, research, and care.If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.Please, try again in a couple of minutesTests and procedures used to diagnose MFS include:MFS diagnosis can be hard because it looks like other types of cancer and other conditions that aren't cancer. Careful imaging and advanced lab tests can help your health care team make the correct diagnosis.MFS treatment often involves surgery to remove the cancer. Other treatments include radiation therapy and chemotherapy.MFS often comes back after treatment. When it comes back, it can be more aggressive. Your health care team creates a treatment plan with the goal of getting rid of all the cancer cells. This makes it more likely that the cancer won't come back.Which treatment is best for you will depend on your cancer. Your care team considers the size and location of your cancer. A cancer that grows quickly has different treatment options than a cancer that grows slowly.The goal of surgery is to cut out as much of the cancer as possible. If all the MFS is removed, surgery might be the only treatment needed.Sometimes it's hard to get all the MFS because this cancer tends to spread out as it grows. It can grow deep into the tissue. Sometimes surgeons can't see all the cancer to make sure it's removed.In the past, surgeons often had to remove a limb to get rid of all the cancer. Today that's often not needed because of newer treatments. Sometimes radiation therapy and chemotherapy are used before surgery to shrink the cancer. This makes it easier to remove.Radiation therapy uses powerful energy beams to kill cancer cells. The energy beams can come from X-rays, protons and other sources.Radiation might be done before surgery to help shrink the MFS. It can also be done after surgery to kill any cancer cells that might be left behind.Chemotherapy is a drug treatment that uses chemicals to kill cancer cells. It might help control a MFS that's growing quickly. It might be an option if MFS doesn't respond to other treatments.Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Sarcoma support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.803 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 57 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 59 Replies Fri, Jun 21, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Physical exam.Imaging tests.Getting a sample of tissue for testing.Advertising & Sponsorship