Nail fungus can cause the nail to become thick, ragged and discolored. An infected nail may separate from the nail bed.Nail fungus is a common infection of the nail. It begins as a white or yellow-brown spot under the tip of your fingernail or toenail. As the fungal infection goes deeper, the nail may discolor, thicken and crumble at the edge. Nail fungus can affect several nails.If your condition is mild and not bothering you, you may not need treatment. If your nail fungus is painful and has caused thickened nails, self-care steps and medications may help. But even if treatment is successful, nail fungus often comes back.Nail fungus is also called onychomycosis (on-ih-koh-my-KOH-sis). When fungus infects the areas between your toes and the skin of your feet, it's called athlete's foot (tinea pedis).Symptoms of nail fungus include a nail or nails that are:Nail fungus can affect fingernails, but it's more common in toenails.You may want to see a health care provider if self-care steps haven't helped and the nail becomes increasingly discolored, thickened or misshapen. Also talk with your health care provider if you have:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesVivien Williams: There's nothing like getting pampered with a pedicure. But before you dip your toes in the water, check to be sure the spa is licensed properly.Rachel Miest, M.D., Department of Dermatology, Mayo Clinic: Oftentimes, those licenses come with the appropriate education, and following the appropriate protocols for how to keep you safe and how to prevent infection.Ms. Williams: Dr. Rachel Miest says bacterial and fungal are the two most common infections. To avoid them, she says, don't be afraid to ask to make sure the spa cleans all equipment between customers.Dr. Miest: Even if all of the appropriate precautions are taken from a cleaning standpoint, bacteria, viruses, fungi ─ these things are everywhere.Ms. Williams: To reduce your risk, Dr. Miest says don't shave 24 hours beforehand and don't have your cuticles cut.Dr. Miest: Ask that they only either leave your cuticles alone or gently push them back but not to aggressively push them back or clip them because that cuticle is a very, very important seal.Ms. Williams: For the Mayo Clinic News Network, I'm Vivien Williams.Vivien Willliams: Your fingernails are clues to your overall health. Many people develop lines or ridges from the cuticle to the tip.Rachel Miest, M.D., Department of Dermatology, Mayo Clinic: Those are actually completely fine and just a part of normal aging.Ms. Williams: But Dr. Rachel Miest says there are other nail changes you should not ignore that may indicate …Dr. Miest: liver problems, kidney problems, nutritional deficiencies …Ms. Williams: And other issues. Here are six examples: No. 1 is pitting. This could be a sign of psoriasis. Two is clubbing. Clubbing happens when your oxygen is low and could be a sign of lung issues. Three is spooning. It can happen if you have iron-deficient anemia or liver disease. Four is called "a Beau's line." It's a horizontal line that indicates a previous injury or infection. Five is nail separation. This may happen as a result of injury, infection or a medication. And six is yellowing of the nails, which may be the result of chronic bronchitis.For the Mayo Clinic News Network, I'm Vivien Williams.Nail fungus is caused by various fungal organisms (fungi). The most common is a type called dermatophyte. Yeast, bacteria and molds also can cause nail infections. The discoloration from a bacterial infection tends to be green or black.Fungal infection of the foot (athlete's foot) can spread to the nail, and a fungal infection of the nail can spread to the foot. You can also get the infection from contact with spaces where fungi can thrive, such as the floor tile in a gym shower or inside dark, sweaty, moist shoes.Factors that can increase your risk of developing nail fungus include:A severe case of nail fungus can be painful and may cause permanent damage to your nails. And it may lead to other serious infections that spread beyond your feet if you have a suppressed immune system due to medication, diabetes or other conditions.The following habits can help prevent nail fungus or reinfections and athlete's foot, which can lead to nail fungus:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Vivien Williams:Rachel Miest, M.D., Department of Dermatology, Mayo Clinic:Ms. Williams:Dr. Miest:Ms. Williams:Dr. Miest:Ms. Williams:Vivien Willliams:Rachel Miest, M.D., Department of Dermatology, Mayo Clinic:Ms. Williams:Dr. Miest:Ms. Williams:Advertising & Sponsorship