Nasal polyps are soft growths on the lining of the nose or the spaces inside the nose, known as sinuses. Nasal polyps aren't cancer. Nasal polyps often occur in groups, like grapes on a stem.Nasal polyps are painless growths inside the nose or the hollow areas inside the bones of the face, also known as sinuses. Nasal polyps aren't cancer.Small nasal polyps might not cause symptoms. Larger growths or groups of nasal polyps can block the nose. They can lead to breathing problems, not being able to smell and infections.Nasal polyps can affect anyone. But they're more common in young and middle-aged adults. Medicines can often shrink nasal polyps or get rid of them. But surgery might be needed to remove them. Even after treatment, nasal polyps often come back.Nasal polyps are linked to irritation and swelling, also called inflammation, of the inside of the nose and sinuses that lasts more than 12 weeks. This is known as chronic sinusitis. But it's possible to have chronic sinusitis without getting nasal polyps.People who have small nasal polyps might not know they have them. But having more than one polyp or having a large polyp can block the nose.Common symptoms of chronic sinusitis with nasal polyps include:See a health care provider for symptoms that last more than 10 days. Symptoms of chronic sinusitis and nasal polyps are like those of many other illnesses, including the common cold.Seek medical care right away or call 911 or your local emergency number if you have:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesExperts don't know what causes nasal polyps. They don't know why some people get nasal polyps and others don't.Infections, allergies or any condition that causes long-term inflammation in the nose or sinuses can increase the risk of having nasal polyps.Conditions often linked to nasal polyps include:Having a family history of nasal polyps also might increase the risk.One of the most common complications of chronic sinusitis with nasal polyps is making asthma worse.The following might help lower the chances of getting nasal polyps or having nasal polyps come back after treatment:Use a nasal rinse. Rinsing the inside of the nose with a saltwater spray or nasal wash might help remove what irritates it.You can buy saltwater sprays and nasal wash kits without a prescription. Nasal wash kits come with a neti pot or squeeze bottle and directions for how to use them.Use water that's distilled or sterile or has been boiled for one minute and cooled. The water can also be filtered using a filter with an absolute pore size of 1 micron or smaller. Rinse the pot or bottle after each use with the distilled, sterile, previously boiled or filtered water and leave it open to dry.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Seek medical care right away or call 911Manage allergies and asthma.Avoid things that can irritate the nose.Wash your hands often and well.Use a machine that adds moisture to the air, known as a humidifier.Use a nasal rinse.Advertising & Sponsorship