Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a genetic condition that causes changes in skin pigment and tumors on nerve tissue. Skin changes include flat, light brown spots and freckles in the armpits and groin. Tumors can grow anywhere in the nervous system, including the brain, spinal cord and nerves. NF1 is rare. About 1 in 2,500 is affected by NF1.The tumors often are not cancerous, known as benign tumors. But sometimes they can become cancerous. Symptoms often are mild. But complications can occur and may include trouble with learning, heart and blood vessel conditions, vision loss, and pain.Treatment focuses on supporting healthy growth and development in children and early management of complications. If NF1 causes large tumors or tumors that press on a nerve, surgery can reduce symptoms. A newer medicine is available to treat tumors in children, and other new treatments are being developed.Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) usually is diagnosed during childhood. Symptoms are seen at birth or shortly afterward and almost always by age 10. Symptoms tend to be mild to moderate, but they can vary from person to person.Symptoms include:See a healthcare professional if your child has symptoms of neurofibromatosis type 1. The tumors are often not cancerous and are slow growing, but complications can be managed. If your child has a plexiform neurofibroma, a medicine is available to treat it.Neurofibromatosis type 1 is caused by an altered gene that either is passed down by a parent or occurs at conception.The NF1 gene is located on chromosome 17. This gene produces a protein called neurofibromin that helps regulate cell growth. When the gene is altered, it causes a loss of neurofibromin. This allows cells to grow without control.In an autosomal dominant disorder, the changed gene is a dominant gene. It's located on one of the nonsex chromosomes, called autosomes. Only one changed gene is needed for someone to be affected by this type of condition. A person with an autosomal dominant condition — in this example, the father — has a 50% chance of having an affected child with one changed gene and a 50% chance of having an unaffected child.The biggest risk factor for neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a family history. For about half of people who have NF1, the disease was passed down from a parent. People who have NF1 and whose relatives aren't affected are likely to have a new change to a gene.NF1 has an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. This means that any child of a parent who is affected by the disease has a 50% chance of having the altered gene.Complications of neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) vary, even within the same family. Generally, complications occur when tumors affect nerve tissue or press on internal organs.Complications of NF1 include:Neurofibromatosis type 1 care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Flat, light brown spots on the skin, known as cafe au lait spots.Freckling in the armpits or groin area.Tiny bumps on the iris of the eye, known as Lisch nodules.Soft, pea-sized bumps on or under the skin called neurofibromas.Bone changes.Tumor on the nerve that connects the eye to the brain, called an optic pathway glioma.Learning disabilities.Larger than average head size.Short stature.Neurological symptoms.Concerns with appearance.Skeletal symptoms.Changes in vision.Increase in symptoms during times of hormonal change.Cardiovascular symptoms.Trouble breathing.Cancer.Benign adrenal gland tumor, known as a pheochromocytoma.Advertising & Sponsorship