Neurodermatitis is a skin condition characterized by chronic itching or scaling. You'll notice raised, rough, itchy areas of skin — typically on the neck, wrists, forearms, legs or groin area.Neurodermatitis is a skin condition that starts with an itchy patch of skin. Scratching makes it itch more. With more scratching, the skin becomes thick and leathery. You may develop several itchy spots, typically on the neck, wrists, forearms, legs or groin area. Neurodermatitis — also known as lichen simplex chronicus — is not life-threatening or contagious. But the itching can be so intense it disrupts your sleep, sexual function and quality of life.Breaking the itch-scratch cycle of neurodermatitis is challenging, and neurodermatitis is usually a long-term condition. It may clear up with treatment but often returns. Treatment focuses on controlling the itching and preventing scratching. It also may help to identify and eliminate factors that worsen your symptoms, such as dry skin.Symptoms of neurodermatitis include:The condition involves areas that can be reached for scratching — the scalp, neck, wrists, forearms, ankles, vulva, scrotum and anus. The itchiness, which can be intense, may come and go or be nonstop. You may scratch your skin out of habit and while sleeping.See your health care provider if home remedies haven't helped after two days and:Seek immediate medical care if your skin becomes painful or looks infected and you have a feverThe exact cause of neurodermatitis isn't known. It can be triggered by something that irritates the skin, such as tight clothing or a bug bite. The more you scratch, the more it itches.Sometimes, neurodermatitis goes along with other skin conditions, such as dry skin, atopic dermatitis or psoriasis. Stress and anxiety also can trigger itching.Factors that can increase the risk of neurodermatitis include:Persistent scratching can lead to a wound, a bacterial skin infection, or permanent scars and changes in skin color (postinflammatory hyperpigmentation or hypopigmentation). The itch of neurodermatitis can affect your sleep, sexual function and quality of life.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Age.Other skin conditions.Family history.Anxiety disorders.Advertising & Sponsorship