A neurofibroma is a type of peripheral nerve tumor that forms soft bumps on or under the skin. A neurofibroma can develop within a major or minor nerve anywhere in the body.This common type of benign nerve tumor tends to form centrally within the nerve. Sometimes it arises from several nerve bundles. When this happens, it's called plexiform neurofibroma.Symptoms are often mild or absent. If the tumor presses against nerves or grows within them, you may experience pain or numbness in the affected area.A neurofibroma usually isn't cancer. Rarely, it can become cancer.A neurofibroma can arise with no known cause, or it may appear in people with a genetic condition called neurofibromatosis type 1. These tumors are most often found in people ages 20 to 40 years.Your health care provider will look at several factors to diagnose a neurofibroma. These may include a physical exam, your medical history, and the results of an imaging test such as a CT or MRI scan.Imaging studies can help pinpoint where the tumor is, find very small tumors, and identify what tissues are affected or nearby. You may undergo a PET scan to get an indication of whether the tumor is benign. You also may have a biopsy done by a radiologist before surgery to diagnose the mass as being a neurofibroma.Neurofibromas are usually monitored or treated with surgery. Treatment isn't needed for single tumors with no symptoms. Surgery may be considered if the tumor is causing symptoms or for cosmetic reasons.Surgery to remove the tumor. Symptoms can be relieved by removing all or part of a neurofibroma that's pressing on nearby tissue or damaging organs. The type of surgery depends on the location and size of your tumor and whether it's intertwined with more than one nerve. The goal of surgery is to remove as much of the tumor as possible without causing further nerve damage.After surgery, you may need physical rehabilitation. Physical therapists and occupational therapists can guide you through specific exercises that keep your muscles and joints active, prevent stiffness, and help restore your function and feeling.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Monitoring.Surgery to remove the tumor.Clinical trials.Advertising & Sponsorship