Compared with a healthy liver (top), a fatty liver (bottom) appears bigger and discolored. Tissue samples show extra fat in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, while inflammation and advanced scarring are seen in nonalcoholic steatohepatitis.Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, often called NAFLD, is a liver problem that affects people who drink little to no alcohol. In NAFLD, too much fat builds up in the liver. It is seen most often in people who are overweight or obese.NAFLD is becoming more common, especially in Middle Eastern and Western nations as the number of people with obesity rises. It is the most common form of liver disease in the world. NAFLD ranges in severity from hepatic steatosis, called fatty liver, to a more severe form of disease called nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH).NASH causes the liver to swell and become damaged due to the fat deposits in the liver. NASH may get worse and may lead to serious liver scarring, called cirrhosis, and even liver cancer. This damage is like the damage caused by heavy alcohol use.A move is currently underway to change the name nonalcoholic fatty liver disease to metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD). Experts also have recommended changing the name nonalcoholic steatohepatitis to metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis (MASH).The liver is the largest internal organ in the body. It's about the size of a football. It sits mainly in the upper right portion of the stomach area, above the stomach.NAFLD often has no symptoms. When it does, they may include:Possible symptoms of NASH and cirrhosis, or severe scarring, include:Make an appointment with a member of your health care team if you have lasting symptoms that worry you.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care.If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.Please, try again in a couple of minutesExperts don't know exactly why fat builds up in some livers and not others. They also don't fully understand why some fatty livers turn into NASH.NAFLD and NASH are both linked to the following:These combined health problems may contribute to a fatty liver. However, some people get NAFLD even if they do not have any risk factors.Many diseases and health problems can increase your risk of NAFLD, including:NASH is more likely in these groups:It is hard to tell apart NAFLD from NASH without a clinical evaluation and testing.A healthy liver, at left, shows no signs of scarring. In cirrhosis, at right, scar tissue replaces healthy liver tissue.Esophageal varices are enlarged veins in the esophagus. They're often due to obstructed blood flow through the portal vein, which carries blood from the intestine to the liver.Liver cancer begins in the liver cells. The most common type of liver cancer starts in cells called hepatocytes and is called hepatocellular carcinoma.Severe liver scarring, or cirrhosis, is the main complication of NAFLD and NASH. Cirrhosis happens because of liver injury, such as the damage caused by inflammation in NASH. As the liver tries to stop inflammation, it creates areas of scarring, also called fibrosis. With ongoing inflammation, fibrosis spreads and takes up more liver tissue.If nothing is done to stop the scarring, cirrhosis can lead to:Experts guess that about 24% of adults in the U.S. have NAFLD, and about 1.5% to 6.5% have NASH.To reduce your risk of NAFLD:Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Transplants support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.1606 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 15 Replies Fri, Jun 21, 2024 100 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Eat a healthy diet.Limit alcohol, simple sugars and portion sizes.Keep a healthy weight.Exercise.Advertising & Sponsorship