Noonan syndrome is a genetic condition that stops typical development in various parts of the body. It can affect a person in several ways, including unusual facial features, short height, heart problems and other physical problems. It also can cause a child to develop more slowly than usual, for example, in walking, talking or learning new things.A changed gene causes Noonan syndrome. A child inherits a copy of an affected gene from a parent. This is called dominant inheritance. The condition also can occur as a spontaneous change. This means there's no family history involved.Doctors manage Noonan syndrome by controlling the symptoms and complications. They may use a growth hormone to treat short height in some people with Noonan syndrome.Symptoms of Noonan syndrome vary greatly and range from mild to severe. These symptoms may be related to the specific gene containing the change.How the face looks is one key feature that leads to a diagnosis of Noonan syndrome. Facial features may be easier to see in infants and young children but change with age. These distinct features become less clear in adults.Noonan syndrome may include these features:Many people with Noonan syndrome are born with a heart problem that causes some of the key symptoms of the condition. This is called congenital heart disease. Also, some heart problems can occur later in life.Some forms of congenital heart disease related to Noonan syndrome include:Noonan syndrome can affect typical growth. Many children with Noonan syndrome do not grow at a typical rate.Issues may include:Some common issues can include:Noonan syndrome does not affect the intelligence of most people who have the condition. But they may have:Common signs of Noonan syndrome are eyes and eyelids that are unusual, including:Noonan syndrome can cause hearing problems due to nerve issues or an inner ear bone structure that is not typical.Noonan syndrome can cause bleeding problems and easy bruising. That's because the blood of some people with Noonan syndrome may not clot properly and may have low levels of proteins that are needed for clots to form. So they bleed longer than usual.Noonan syndrome can cause problems with the lymphatic system, which drains excess fluid from the body and helps fight infection. These problems:Many people with Noonan syndrome have problems with their genitals and kidneys:People with Noonan syndrome may have skin conditions. They may have various problems that affect the color and texture of the skin. They also may have coarse or sparse hair.Sometimes the symptoms of Noonan syndrome can be hard to see. If you suspect you or your child may have this condition, see your primary care professional or your child's pediatrician. You may be referred to a specialist in genetics or a specialist in heart problems or another type of doctor, depending on the symptoms.If your unborn child is at risk because of a family history of Noonan syndrome, tests may be able to be done before birth.In an autosomal dominant disorder, the changed gene is a dominant gene. It's located on one of the nonsex chromosomes, called autosomes. Only one changed gene is needed for someone to be affected by this type of condition. A person with an autosomal dominant condition — in this example, the father — has a 50% chance of having an affected child with one changed gene and a 50% chance of having an unaffected child.A change in one or more genes can cause Noonan syndrome. Changes in these genes produce proteins that are always active. Because these genes play a role in how tissues form in the body, this constant activation of proteins disrupts the typical process of cell growth and division.The gene changes that cause Noonan syndrome can be:In some cases, the cause of Noonan syndrome is not known.A parent with Noonan syndrome has a 50% chance of passing the changed gene to a child. The child who inherits the irregular gene may or may not have more symptoms than the parent who is affected.Complications from Noonan syndrome can arise that may need attention, including:If you have a family history of Noonan syndrome, talk to your doctor or health care team about the benefits of genetic counseling before you have children. Genetic testing can detect Noonan syndrome.If Noonan syndrome is detected early, it's possible that proper and ongoing care may lessen complications such as heart disease.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.EyesEarsNoseMouthFacial featuresHeadSkinValve conditions.Thickening of the heart muscle.Other heart problems.Irregular heart rhythm.Testicles.Puberty.Fertility.Kidneys.Inherited.Random.Developmental delays.Bleeding and bruising.Buildup of fluid.Urinary tract issues.Fertility issues.Higher risk of cancer.Advertising & Sponsorship