Occupational asthma is a type of asthma caused by breathing in fumes, gases, dust or other substances while on the job. These substances can trigger an immune system response that changes how the lungs work. Occupational asthma also is called work-related asthma.In asthma, the airways narrow and swell. They also may make extra mucus. This makes it difficult to breathe and may cause chest tightness, wheezing and shortness of breath.Avoiding triggers is important for managing occupational asthma. Treatment includes medicines that reduce symptoms. For people who were diagnosed with asthma in the past, medicines may help improve symptoms related to workplace triggers.If occupational asthma is not treated and triggers are not avoided, the asthma can cause permanent changes to the lungs.When a person has asthma, the inside walls of the airways in the lungs can narrow and swell. Also, the airway linings may make too much mucus. The result is an asthma attack. During an asthma attack, narrowed airways make breathing difficult and may cause coughing and wheezing.Occupational asthma symptoms may include:Other possible symptoms may include:Occupational asthma symptoms depend on the substance you're exposed to, how long and how often you're exposed, and other factors. Your symptoms may:Seek medical treatment right away if your symptoms worsen. Severe asthma attacks can be life-threatening. Symptoms of an asthma attack that need emergency treatment include:Make an appointment to see your healthcare professional if you have breathing problems, such as coughing, wheezing or shortness of breath, especially if the symptoms don't go away or worsen.More than 400 workplace substances have been identified as possible triggers of occupational asthma. These substances include:Asthma symptoms start when your lungs become irritated. This irritation causes an immune system reaction called inflammation. Inflammation is defined as swelling and other changes in airway tissues caused by immune system activity. These changes narrow the airways and make it difficult to breathe.With occupational asthma, lung inflammation may be triggered by a substance that a person is allergic to, such as mold or an animal protein. Sometimes lung inflammation is triggered by an irritating substance, also called an irritant, such as chlorine or smoke.The more you're exposed to an irritant, the greater the risk of developing occupational asthma. In addition, you will have increased risk if:It's possible to develop occupational asthma in almost any workplace. But your risk is higher in certain workplaces. Some of the riskiest jobs linked to asthma-producing substances include the following:The longer you're exposed to a substance that can cause occupational asthma, the worse your symptoms may become. Also, the longer you're exposed, the longer it will take for symptoms to improve after exposure stops. In some cases, exposure to airborne asthma triggers can cause permanent changes to your lungs.The best way to prevent occupational asthma is to control exposure to chemicals and other substances that are known to be irritating. Workplaces can set up controls to prevent exposures, use less harmful substances and provide personal protective equipment (PPE) for workers.Medicines may help relieve symptoms and control inflammation linked to occupational asthma. But you can do several things on your own to be healthy and lessen the possibility of attacks:If you are in the United States and you have a high-risk job, your company must follow rules to help protect you from harmful chemicals. Under guidelines from the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), your employer is required to do the following:Under OSHA guidelines, your employer is required to keep a material safety data sheet (MSDS) for each harmful chemical used in your workplace. This is a document that must be submitted by the chemical's manufacturer to your employer. You have a legal right to see and copy such documents. If you suspect you're allergic to a certain substance, show the MSDS to your healthcare professional.While at work, watch for conditions that may not be safe or healthy. Report concerns to your supervisor. If necessary, call OSHA at 800-321-OSHA (800-321-6742) and ask for an on-site inspection. You can do this so that your name won't be revealed to your employer.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Animal proteinsChemicalsEnzymesMetals,Plant substances,Irritating gases or particles,You have existing allergies or asthma.Other family members have allergies or asthma.You work around known asthma triggers.You smoke.If you smoke, quit.Get a flu vaccination.Avoid nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)Lose weight.Tell youTrain youTrain youSupply protective gear,Offer extra trainingAdvertising & Sponsorship