Ocular rosacea (roe-ZAY-she-uh) is inflammation that causes redness, burning and itching of the eyes. It often develops in people who have rosacea, a chronic skin condition that affects the face. Sometimes ocular (eye) rosacea is the first sign that you may later develop the facial type.Ocular rosacea primarily affects adults between the ages of 30 and 50. It seems to develop in people who tend to blush and flush easily.There's no cure for ocular rosacea, but medications and a good eye care routine can help control the signs and symptoms.Signs and symptoms of ocular rosacea can precede the skin symptoms of rosacea, develop at the same time, develop later or occur on their own. Signs and symptoms of ocular rosacea may include:The severity of ocular rosacea symptoms doesn't always match the severity of skin symptoms. Make an appointment to see a doctor if you have signs and symptoms of ocular rosacea, such as dry eyes, burning or itchy eyes, redness, or blurred vision.If you've been diagnosed with skin rosacea, ask your doctor whether you should undergo periodic eye exams to check for ocular rosacea.The exact cause of ocular rosacea, like skin rosacea, is unknown. It may be due to one or more factors, including:Some research has also shown a possible link between skin rosacea and Helicobacter pylori bacteria, which is the same bacteria that causes gastrointestinal infections.A number of factors that aggravate skin rosacea can aggravate ocular rosacea, as well. Some of these factors include:Ocular rosacea is common in people with skin rosacea, although you can also have ocular rosacea without the skin being involved. Skin rosacea affects more women than men, and ocular rosacea affects men and women equally. It's also more common in fair-skinned people of Celtic and Northern European origin.Ocular rosacea may affect the surface of your eye (cornea), particularly when you have dry eyes from evaporation of tears. Corneal complications can lead to visual symptoms. Inflammation of your eyelids (blepharitis) can cause secondary irritation of the cornea from misdirected eyelashes or other complications. Ultimately, corneal complications can lead to vision loss.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship