This white lacelike patch on the interior surface of the cheek is typical for oral lichen planus.Oral lichen planus (LIE-kun PLAY-nus) is an ongoing (chronic) inflammatory condition that affects mucous membranes inside your mouth. Oral lichen planus may appear as white, lacy patches; red, swollen tissues; or open sores. These lesions may cause burning, pain or other discomfort.Oral lichen planus can't be passed from one person to another. The disorder occurs when the immune system mounts an attack against cells of the oral mucous membranes for unknown reasons.Symptoms can usually be managed, but people who have oral lichen planus need regular monitoring because they may be at risk of developing mouth cancer in the affected areas.Signs and symptoms of oral lichen planus affect the mucous membranes of the mouth.The lesions may appear as:These lesions may appear on the:The white, lacy patches may not cause discomfort when they appear on the inside of the cheeks. However, symptoms accompanying red, swollen patches and open sores may include:If you have oral lichen planus, you may have lichen planus lesions affecting other parts of your body.See your doctor or dentist if you have any signs or symptoms listed above.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesIt's not known what causes oral lichen planus. However, T lymphocytes — certain white blood cells involved in inflammation — appear to be activated in oral lichen planus. This could indicate an immune disorder, and genetic factors may be involved. But more research is needed to determine the exact cause.It's possible that, in some people, oral lichen planus may be triggered by certain medications, mouth injury, infection or allergy-causing agents such as dental materials. Stress may be involved in symptoms becoming worse or recurring. However, these causes are not confirmed.Anyone can develop oral lichen planus, but it's more common in middle-aged women.Some factors may increase your risk of developing oral lichen planus, such as having a disorder that lowers your immunity or taking certain medications, though more research is needed.Severe cases of oral lichen planus may increase the risk of:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Skin.Genitals.Ears.Scalp.Nails.Eyes.Esophagus.Advertising & Sponsorship