Orthostatic hypotension — also called postural hypotension — is a form of low blood pressure that happens when standing after sitting or lying down. Orthostatic hypotension can cause dizziness or lightheadedness and possibly fainting.Orthostatic hypotension can be mild. Episodes might be brief. However, long-lasting orthostatic hypotension can signal more-serious problems. It's important to see a health care provider if you frequently feel lightheaded when standing up.Occasional orthostatic hypotension is usually caused by something obvious, such as dehydration or lengthy bed rest. The condition is easily treated. Chronic orthostatic hypotension is usually a sign of another health problem, so treatment depends on the cause.The most common symptom of orthostatic hypotension is lightheadedness or dizziness when standing after sitting or lying down. Symptoms usually last less than a few minutes.Orthostatic hypotension signs and symptoms include:Occasional dizziness or lightheadedness can be minor — triggered by mild dehydration, low blood sugar or overheating. Dizziness or lightheadedness can also result from standing after sitting for a long time. If these symptoms happen only occasionally, there's likely no cause for concern.It's important to see a health care provider for frequent symptoms of orthostatic hypotension. Losing consciousness, even for just a few seconds, is serious. It requires seeing a provider right away.Keep a record of your symptoms, when they occurred, how long they lasted and what you were doing at the time. Tell your care provider if symptoms occur at times that could be dangerous, such as while driving.When standing from a sitting or lying position, gravity causes blood to collect in the legs and belly. Blood pressure drops because there's less blood flowing back to the heart.Usually, special cells (baroreceptors) near the heart and neck arteries sense this lower blood pressure. The baroreceptors send signals to the brain. This tells the heart to beat faster and pump more blood, which evens out blood pressure. These cells also narrow the blood vessels and increase blood pressure.Orthostatic hypotension occurs when something interrupts the body's process of dealing with the low blood pressure. Many conditions can cause orthostatic hypotension, including:The risk factors for orthostatic hypotension include:Medications. These include medications used to treat high blood pressure or heart disease, such as diuretics, alpha blockers, beta blockers, calcium channel blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and nitrates.Other medications that can increase the risk of orthostatic hypotension include medications used to treat Parkinson's disease, certain antidepressants, certain antipsychotics, muscle relaxants, medications to treat erectile dysfunction and narcotics.Persistent orthostatic hypotension can cause serious complications, especially in older adults. These include:May 26, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.