Osteosarcoma is a kind of bone cancer. It most often starts in the long bones of the legs or the arms. But it can happen in any bone.Osteosarcoma is a kind of cancer that begins in the cells that form bones. Osteosarcoma tends to happen most often in teenagers and young adults. But it also can happen in younger children and older adults.Osteosarcoma can start in any bone. It's most often found in the long bones of the legs, and sometimes the arms. Very rarely, it happens in soft tissue outside the bone.Advances in the treatment of osteosarcoma have improved the outlook for this cancer. After treatment for osteosarcoma, people sometimes face late effects from the strong treatments used to control the cancer. Healthcare professionals often suggest lifelong monitoring for side effects after treatment.Osteosarcoma signs and symptoms most often start in a bone. The cancer most often affects the long bones of the legs, and sometimes the arms. The most common symptoms include:Make an appointment with a healthcare professional if you or your child has ongoing symptoms that worry you. Osteosarcoma symptoms are like those of many more common conditions, such as sports injuries. The health professional might check for those causes first.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Subscribe for free and receive an in-depth guide to coping with cancer, plus helpful information on how to get a second opinion. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview.ErrorSelect a topicErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.Your in-depth coping with cancer guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest about cancer news, research, and care.If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.Please, try again in a couple of minutesIt's not clear what causes osteosarcoma.Osteosarcoma happens when bone cells develop changes in their DNA. A cell's DNA holds the instructions, called genes, that tell a cell what to do. In healthy cells, the DNA gives instructions to grow and multiply at a set rate. The instructions tell the cells to die at a set time.In cancer cells, the DNA changes give different instructions. The changes tell the cancer cells to make many more cells quickly. Cancer cells can keep living when healthy cells would die. This causes too many cells.The cancer cells might form a mass called a tumor. The tumor can grow to invade and destroy healthy body tissue. In time, cancer cells can break away and spread to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads, it's called metastatic cancer.Most people with osteosarcoma don't have any known risk factors for the cancer. But these factors can increase the risk of osteosarcoma:There is no way to prevent osteosarcoma.Complications of osteosarcoma and its treatment include the following.Osteosarcoma can spread from where it started to other areas. This makes treatment and recovery harder. Osteosarcoma most often spreads to the lungs, the same bone or another bone.Surgeons aim to remove the cancer and spare the arm or leg when they can. But sometimes surgeons need to remove part of the affected limb to remove all the cancer. Learning to use an artificial limb, called a prosthesis, takes time, practice and patience. Experts can help.The strong treatments needed to control osteosarcoma can cause major side effects, both in the short and long term. Your healthcare team can help you or your child manage the side effects that happen during treatment. The team also can give you a list of side effects to watch for in the years after treatment.Osteosarcoma care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Adolescent & Young Adult (AYA) Cancer support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.4 Replies Tue, Jun 04, 2024 1 Replies Tue, Jun 04, 2024 3 Replies Thu, May 23, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship