Ovarian cancer is a type of cancer that begins in the ovaries. The ovaries are each about the size of an almond. They produce eggs, called ova, as well as the hormones estrogen and progesterone.Ovarian cancer is a growth of cells that forms in the ovaries. The cells multiply quickly and can invade and destroy healthy body tissue.The female reproductive system contains two ovaries, one on each side of the uterus. The ovaries — each about the size of an almond — produce eggs (ova) as well as the hormones estrogen and progesterone.Ovarian cancer treatment usually involves surgery and chemotherapy.The ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix and vagina (vaginal canal) make up the female reproductive system.When ovarian cancer first develops, it might not cause any noticeable symptoms. When ovarian cancer symptoms happen, they're usually attributed to other, more common conditions.Signs and symptoms of ovarian cancer may include:Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any signs or symptoms that worry you.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesIt's not clear what causes ovarian cancer, though doctors have identified things that can increase the risk of the disease.Doctors know that ovarian cancer begins when cells in or near the ovaries develop changes (mutations) in their DNA. A cell's DNA contains the instructions that tell the cell what to do. The changes tell the cells to grow and multiply quickly, creating a mass (tumor) of cancer cells. The cancer cells continue living when healthy cells would die. They can invade nearby tissues and break off from an initial tumor to spread (metastasize) to other parts of the body.The type of cell where the cancer begins determines the type of ovarian cancer you have and helps your doctor determine which treatments are best for you. Ovarian cancer types include:Factors that can increase your risk of ovarian cancer include:Inherited gene changes. A small percentage of ovarian cancers are caused by genes changes you inherit from your parents. The genes that increase the risk of ovarian cancer include BRCA1 and BRCA2. These genes also increase the risk of breast cancer.Several other gene changes are known to increase the risk of ovarian cancer, including gene changes associated with Lynch syndrome and the genes BRIP1, RAD51C and RAD51D.There's no sure way to prevent ovarian cancer. But there may be ways to reduce your risk:Ovarian cancer care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Gynecologic Cancers support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.63 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 63 Replies Fri, Jun 21, 2024 30 Replies Wed, Jun 19, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Epithelial ovarian cancer.Stromal tumors.Germ cell tumors.Older age.Inherited gene changes.Family history of ovarian cancer.Being overweight or obese.Postmenopausal hormone replacement therapy.Endometriosis.Age when menstruation started and ended.Never having been pregnant.Consider taking birth control pills.Discuss your risk factors with your doctor.Advertising & Sponsorship