Overactive bladder, also called OAB, causes sudden urges to urinate that may be hard to control. There might be a need to pass urine many times during the day and night. There also might be loss of urine that isn't intended, called urgency incontinence.People with an overactive bladder might feel self-conscious. That can cause them to keep away from others or limit their work and social life. The good news is that it can be treated.Simple behavior changes might manage symptoms of an overactive bladder. These might include changes in diet, urinating on a certain schedule and using pelvic floor muscles to control the bladder. There also are other treatments to try.If you have an overactive bladder, you may:Even if you can get to the toilet in time when you feel an urge to urinate, having to urinate often during day and night can disrupt your life.Although common among older adults, overactive bladder isn't a typical part of aging. It might not be easy to talk about your symptoms. But if the symptoms distress you or disrupt your life, talk to your healthcare professional. There are treatments that might help.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesYour urinary system includes the kidneys, ureters, bladder and urethra. The urinary system removes waste from the body through urine. The kidneys are located toward the back of the upper abdomen. They filter waste and fluid from the blood and produce urine. Urine moves from the kidneys through narrow tubes to the bladder. These tubes are called the ureters. The bladder stores urine until it's time to urinate. Urine leaves the body through another small tube called the urethra.Your urinary system includes the kidneys, ureters, bladder and urethra. The urinary system removes waste from the body through urine. The kidneys are located toward the back of the upper abdomen. They filter waste and fluid from the blood and produce urine. Urine moves from the kidneys through narrow tubes to the bladder. These tubes are called the ureters. The bladder stores urine until it's time to urinate. Urine leaves the body through another small tube called the urethra.The kidneys make urine, which drains into the bladder. When urinating, urine passes from the bladder through a tube called the urethra (u-REE-thruh). A muscle in the urethra called the sphincter opens to release urine out of the body.In people assigned female at birth, the urethral opening is just above the vaginal opening. In people assigned male at birth, the urethral opening is at the tip of the penis.As the bladder fills, nerve signals sent to the brain trigger the need to urinate. When urinating, these nerve signals cause the pelvic floor muscles and the muscles of the urethra, called the urinary sphincter muscles, to relax. The muscles of the bladder tighten, also called contract, pushing the urine out.Overactive bladder happens when the muscles of the bladder start to tighten on their own even when the amount of urine in the bladder is low. These are called involuntary contractions. They cause an urgent need to urinate.Several conditions may be a part of overactive bladder, including:Overactive bladder symptoms also may be linked to:Sometimes the cause of overactive bladder isn't known.Aging increases the risk of overactive bladder. So does being female. Conditions such as enlarged prostate and diabetes also can increase the risk.Many people with declines in thinking ability, such as those who have had a stroke or have Alzheimer's disease, get an overactive bladder. That's because they're less able to notice the symptoms of needing to urinate. Drinking fluids on a schedule, timing and prompting urination, absorbent garments, and bowel programs can help manage the condition.Some people with an overactive bladder also have trouble with bowel control. Tell your healthcare professional if you're having trouble controlling your bowels.Any type of incontinence can affect quality of life. If your overactive bladder symptoms disrupt your life, you might also have:People assigned female at birth who have an overactive bladder also may have a condition called mixed incontinence. This has both urgency and stress incontinence.Stress incontinence is the sudden loss of urine from physical movement or activity that puts pressure on the bladder. Examples are coughing, sneezing, laughing or exercising.These healthy lifestyle choices may reduce your risk of overactive bladder:Overactive bladder care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship