Paget's (PAJ-its) disease of bone interferes with your body's normal recycling process, in which new bone tissue gradually replaces old bone tissue. Over time, bones can become fragile and misshapen. The pelvis, skull, spine and legs are most commonly affected.The risk of Paget's disease of bone increases with age and if family members have the disorder. However, for reasons unknown to doctors, the disease has become less common over the past several years and is less severe when it does develop. Complications can include broken bones, hearing loss and pinched nerves in your spine.Bisphosphonates — the medications used to strengthen bones weakened by osteoporosis — are the mainstay of treatment. Surgery may be necessary if complications occur.Most people who have Paget's disease of bone have no symptoms. When symptoms occur, the most common complaint is bone pain.Because this disease causes your body to generate new bone faster than normal, the rapid remodeling produces bone that's less organized and weaker than normal bone, which can lead to bone pain, deformities and fractures.The disease might affect only one or two areas of your body or might be widespread. Your signs and symptoms, if any, will depend on the affected part of your body.Talk to your doctor if you have:The cause of Paget's disease of bone is unknown. Scientists suspect a combination of environmental and genetic factors contribute to the disease. Several genes appear to be linked to getting the disease.Some scientists believe Paget's disease of bone is related to a viral infection in your bone cells, but this theory is controversial.Factors that can increase your risk of Paget's disease of bone include:In most cases, Paget's disease of bone progresses slowly. The disease can be managed effectively in nearly all people. Possible complications include:Jan 11, 2023CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.