Painful intercourse can happen for reasons that range from structural problems to psychological concerns. Many people have painful intercourse at some point in their lives.The medical term for painful intercourse is dyspareunia (dis-puh-ROO-nee-uh). It is lasting or recurrent genital pain that occurs just before, during or after sex. Talk with your healthcare professional if you're having painful intercourse. Treatments focus on the cause and can help stop or ease this common problem.If you have painful intercourse, you might feel:If you have recurrent pain during sex, talk with your healthcare professional. Treating the problem can help your sex life, your emotional intimacy and your self-image.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Get the latest information from our Mayo Clinic experts on women’s health topics, serious and complex conditions, wellness and more. Click to view a preview and subscribe below.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesPhysical causes of painful intercourse differ, depending on whether the pain happens at entry or with deep thrusting. Emotional factors can be linked to many types of painful intercourse.Pain during penetration might be associated with a range of factors, including:Not enough lubrication. This is often the result of not enough foreplay. A drop in estrogen levels after menopause or childbirth or during breastfeeding also can be a cause.Certain medicines can affect sexual desire or arousal. That can decrease lubrication and make sex painful. Those medicines include antidepressants, high blood pressure medicines, sedatives, antihistamines and certain birth control pills.Deep pain usually occurs with deep penetration. It might be worse in certain positions. Causes include:Emotions are deeply intertwined with sexual activity, so they might play a role in sexual pain. Emotional factors include:It can be hard to tell whether emotional factors are associated with dyspareunia. Initial pain can lead to fear of recurring pain, making it difficult to relax, which can lead to more pain. You might start avoiding sex if you associate it with the pain.Many factors can raise the risk of painful intercourse. They include illnesses, surgeries and other medical treatments, and mental health issues.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Not enough lubrication.Injury, trauma or irritation.Inflammation, infection or skin disorders.Vaginismus.A problem present at birth.Certain illnesses and conditions.Surgeries or medical treatments.Psychological issues.Stress.History of sexual abuse.Advertising & Sponsorship