Gallstones are a common cause of pancreatitis. Gallstones, produced in the gallbladder, can slip out of the gallbladder and block the bile duct, stopping pancreatic enzymes from traveling to the small intestine and forcing them back into the pancreas. The enzymes then begin to irritate the cells of the pancreas, causing the inflammation associated with pancreatitis.Pancreatitis is inflammation of the pancreas. Inflammation is immune system activity that can cause swelling, pain, and changes in how an organ or tissues work.The pancreas is a long, flat gland that's tucked behind the stomach. The pancreas helps the body digest food and regulates blood sugars.Pancreatitis can be an acute condition. This means it appears suddenly and generally lasts a short time. Chronic pancreatitis is a long-term condition. The damage to the pancreas can get worse over time.Acute pancreatitis may improve on its own. More-serious disease requires treatment in a hospital and can cause life-threatening complications.Symptoms of pancreatitis may vary. Acute pancreatitis symptoms may include:Chronic pancreatitis signs and symptoms include:Some people with chronic pancreatitis only develop symptoms after they get complications of the disease.Make an appointment with your doctor if you have sudden belly pain or belly pain that doesn't improve. Seek immediate medical help if your pain is so severe that you can't sit still or find a position that makes you more comfortable.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care.If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe pancreas has two major roles. It produces insulin, which helps the body manage and use sugars.The pancreas also produces dietary juices, called enzymes, that help with digestion. The pancreas makes and stores "turned off" versions of the enzymes. After the pancreas sends the enzymes into the small intestine, they are "turned on" and break down proteins in the small intestine.If the enzymes are turned on too soon, they can start acting like digestive juices inside the pancreas. The action can irritate, damage or destroy cells. This problem, in turn, leads to immune system responses that cause swelling and other events that affect how the pancreas works.Several conditions can lead to acute pancreatitis, including:Conditions that can lead to chronic pancreatitis include:Sometimes, a cause for pancreatitis is never found. This is known as idiopathic pancreatitis.Factors that increase your risk of pancreatitis include:Pancreatitis can cause serious complications, including:Pancreatitis care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Excessive alcohol use.Cigarette smoking.Obesity.Diabetes.Family history of pancreatitis.Kidney failure.Breathing problems.Infection.Pseudocyst.Malnutrition.Diabetes.Pancreatic cancer.Advertising & Sponsorship