Pancreatic cysts are saclike pockets of fluid on or in your pancreas. The pancreas is a large organ behind the stomach that produces hormones and enzymes that help digest food. Pancreatic cysts are typically found during imaging testing for another problem. The pancreas is a large organ that lies across your upper abdomen behind your stomach. The main categories of pancreatic cysts can be divided into two groups, nonneoplastic or neoplastic cysts. Each group includes many different subtypes of cysts, such as pseudocysts, serous cystadenomas and mucinous cystic neoplasms. Most aren't cancerous, and many don't cause symptoms. But some pancreatic cysts can be or can become cancerous.Your doctor might take a sample of the pancreatic cyst fluid to determine if cancer cells are present. Or your doctor might recommend monitoring a cyst over time for changes that indicate cancer.You may not have symptoms from pancreatic cysts, which are often found when imaging tests of the abdomen are done for another reason.When signs or symptoms of pancreatic cysts do occur, they typically include:Rarely, cysts can become infected. See a doctor if you have a fever and persistent abdominal pain.A ruptured pancreatic cyst can be a medical emergency, but fortunately is rare. A ruptured cyst can also cause infection of the abdominal cavity (peritonitis).The cause of most pancreatic cysts is unknown. Some cysts are associated with rare illnesses, including polycystic kidney disease or von Hippel-Lindau disease, a genetic disorder that can affect the pancreas and other organs.Pseudocysts often follow a bout of a painful condition in which digestive enzymes become prematurely active and irritate the pancreas (pancreatitis). Pseudocysts can also result from injury to the abdomen, such as from a car accident.Heavy alcohol use and gallstones are risk factors for pancreatitis, and pancreatitis is a risk factor for pseudocysts. Abdominal injury is also a risk factor for pseudocysts.The best way to avoid pseudocysts is to avoid pancreatitis, which is usually caused by gallstones or heavy alcohol use. If gallstones are triggering pancreatitis, you may need to have your gallbladder removed. If your pancreatitis is due to alcohol use, not drinking can reduce your risk.Mar 05, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.