Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors are a rare type of cancer that starts as a growth of cells in the pancreas. The pancreas is a long, flat gland that sits behind the stomach. It makes enzymes and hormones that help digest food.Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors start from the hormone-producing cells in the pancreas. These cells are called islet cells. Another term for pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor is islet cell cancer.Some pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor cells keep making hormones. These are known as functional tumors. Functional tumors create too much of the given hormone. Examples of functional tumors include insulinoma, gastrinoma and glucagonoma.Most pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors do not produce an excess amount of hormones. Tumors that don't produce extra hormones are called nonfunctional tumors.Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors sometimes don't cause symptoms. When they do, symptoms can include:Make an appointment with a health care professional if you have any symptoms that worry you.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Subscribe for free and receive an in-depth guide to coping with cancer, plus helpful information on how to get a second opinion. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview.ErrorSelect a topicErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.Your in-depth coping with cancer guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest about cancer news, research, and care.If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.Please, try again in a couple of minutesPancreatic neuroendocrine tumors happen when cells in the pancreas develop changes in their DNA. A cell's DNA holds the instructions that tell the cell what to do. The changes, which doctors call mutations, tell the cells to multiply quickly. The changes let the cells continue living when healthy cells would die as part of their natural life cycle. This causes many extra cells. The cells might form a mass called a tumor. Sometimes the cells can break away and spread to other organs, such as the liver. When cancer spreads, it's called metastatic cancer.In pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors, the DNA changes happen in hormone-producing cells called islet cells. It's not clear what causes the changes that lead to cancer.Factors that are associated with an increased risk of pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors include:There's no way to prevent pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors. If you develop this type of cancer, you didn't do anything to cause it.Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Neuroendocrine Tumors (NETs) support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.184 Replies Tue, Jun 18, 2024 96 Replies Tue, Jun 18, 2024 111 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.A family history of pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors.Syndromes present at birth that increase the risk of tumors.Advertising & Sponsorship