Paraneoplastic syndromes of the nervous system are a group of rare conditions that develop in some people who have cancer. In addition to the nervous system, paraneoplastic syndromes also can affect other organ systems including hormones, skin, blood and joints.Paraneoplastic syndromes of the nervous system occur when cancer-fighting agents of the immune system also attack parts of the brain, spinal cord, peripheral nerves or muscle.Depending on where the nervous system is affected, paraneoplastic syndromes can affect muscle movement, coordination, sensory perception, memory, thinking skills or even sleep.Sometimes the injury to the nervous system can be reversed with therapy directed toward the cancer and the immune system. But sometimes paraneoplastic syndromes can result in permanent damage to the nervous system.Treating the cancer and other therapies may prevent further damage and improve symptoms and quality of life.Symptoms of paraneoplastic syndromes of the nervous system can develop relatively quickly, often over days to weeks. They often begin even before a cancer is diagnosed.Symptoms vary depending on the body part being injured, and may include:Examples of paraneoplastic syndromes of the nervous system include:Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome. This syndrome is caused by disrupted communication between nerves and muscles. Symptoms include muscle weakness in the pelvis and legs, and fatigue. It also may cause trouble swallowing and speaking, irregular eye movement, and double vision. Other symptoms may include dry mouth and erectile dysfunction.When it occurs as a paraneoplastic syndrome, Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome is typically associated with lung cancer.Myasthenia gravis. Myasthenia gravis also is related to disrupted communication between nerves and muscles. People with myasthenia gravis have weakness and rapid fatigue of any of the muscles that are under voluntary control. These include muscles in the face, eyes, arms and legs. The muscles involved in chewing, swallowing, talking and breathing may be affected as well.When myasthenia gravis occurs as a paraneoplastic syndrome, it is typically associated with cancer of the thymus gland, known as thymoma.Symptoms of paraneoplastic syndromes of the nervous system are similar to those of many conditions, including cancer, cancer complications and some cancer treatments.But if you have any symptoms suggesting a paraneoplastic syndrome, see your healthcare professional as soon as possible. Early diagnosis and appropriate care are important for treating the cancer and preventing further damage of the nervous system.Paraneoplastic syndromes of the nervous system are not caused by cancer cells directly or by the cancer spreading, known as metastasis. They're also not caused by other complications, such as infections or treatment side effects. Instead, the syndromes occur alongside the cancer as a result of the activation of your immune system.Researchers believe that paraneoplastic syndromes of the nervous system are caused by cancer-fighting abilities of the immune system. In particular, antibodies and certain white blood cells, known as T cells, are thought to be involved. Instead of attacking only the cancer cells, these immune system agents also attack the healthy cells of the nervous system.Any cancer may be associated with a paraneoplastic syndrome of the nervous system. However, it occurs more often in people with cancers of the lung, ovary, breast, testis or lymphatic system.Paraneoplastic syndromes of the nervous system care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Cerebellar degeneration, also known as cerebellar ataxia.Limbic encephalitis.Encephalomyelitis.Opsoclonus-myoclonus.Stiff person syndrome.Myelopathy.Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome.Myasthenia gravis.Neuromyotonia, also known as Isaacs' syndrome.Peripheral neuropathy.Dysautonomia.Advertising & Sponsorship