In partial anomalous pulmonary venous return, some of the pulmonary veins incorrectly send blood to the heart's upper right chamber. That chamber is called the right atrium. Usually, oxygen-rich blood flows from the pulmonary veins to the upper left heart chamber, as shown on the left.Partial anomalous pulmonary venous return is a rare heart problem that's present at birth. That means it is a congenital heart defect.Other names for this condition are:In this condition, some of the blood vessels of the lungs attach to the wrong place in the heart. These blood vessels are called the pulmonary veins.In a typical heart, oxygen-rich blood goes from the lungs to the upper left heart chamber, called the left atrium. Then the blood flows through the body.In PAPVR, blood flows from the lungs into the upper right heart chamber, called the right atrium. Extra blood flows to the right side of the heart. This may cause swelling of the right heart chambers.Some people with PAPVR have a hole between the upper heart chambers called an atrial septal defect. The hole lets blood flow between the upper heart chambers. Other heart problems also may occur. A child born with Turner syndrome has an increased risk of PAPVR.Symptoms depend on whether there are other heart problems. A common symptom of PAPVR is breathing trouble.If PAPVR occurs with other heart problems, it may be diagnosed soon after birth. If the condition is mild, it may not be diagnosed until adulthood.A health care provider does a physical exam and listens to the heart with a stethoscope. A whooshing sound, called a heart murmur, may be heard.An echocardiogram is done to diagnose partial anomalous pulmonary venous return. This test uses sound waves to create images of the beating heart. An echocardiogram shows the pulmonary veins and the size of the heart chambers. It also measures the speed of blood flow. An echocardiogram can help diagnose a hole in the heart.Other tests such as an electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG), a chest X-ray or a CT scan may be done if more information is needed.Surgery to repair the heart may be needed if:If you don't have symptoms, surgery may not be needed. If surgery for another heart condition is needed, surgeons may repair PAPVR at the same time.During PAPVR repair surgery, the heart surgeon:A person with partial anomalous pulmonary venous return needs regular health checkups for life to check for complications. It's best to see a health care provider who is trained in congenital heart diseases. This type of provider is called a congenital cardiologist.Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Transplants support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.1606 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 15 Replies Fri, Jun 21, 2024 100 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship