Patent ductus arteriosus is a persistent opening between the two main blood vessels leaving the heart. Those vessels are the aorta and the pulmonary artery. The condition is present at birth.Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) is a persistent opening between the two major blood vessels leading from the heart. The heart problem is present from birth. That means it is a congenital heart defect.An opening called the ductus arteriosus is part of a baby's blood flow system in the womb. It usually closes shortly after birth. If it remains open, it's called a patent ductus arteriosus.A small patent ductus arteriosus often doesn't cause problems and might never need treatment. However, a large, untreated patent ductus arteriosus can let oxygen-poor blood move the wrong way. This can weaken the heart muscle, causing heart failure and other complications.Treatment options for a patent ductus arteriosus include regular health checkups, medicines, and a procedure or surgery to close the opening.Patent ductus arteriosus symptoms (PDA) depend on the size of the opening and the person's age. A small PDA might not cause symptoms. Some people don't notice symptoms until adulthood. A large PDA can cause symptoms of heart failure soon after birth.A large PDA found during infancy or childhood might cause:Contact the doctor if your baby or older child:The exact causes of congenital heart defects are unclear. During the first six weeks of pregnancy, a baby's heart starts to form and beat. The major blood vessels to and from the heart grow. It's during this time that certain heart defects may begin to develop.Before birth, a temporary opening called the ductus arteriosus is between the two main blood vessels leaving a baby's heart. Those vessels are the aorta and the pulmonary artery. The opening is necessary for a baby's blood flow before birth. It moves blood away from a baby's lungs while they develop. The baby gets oxygen from the mother's blood.After birth, the ductus arteriosus is no longer needed. It usually closes within 2 to 3 days. But in some infants, the opening doesn't close. When it stays open, it's called a patent ductus arteriosus.The persistent opening causes too much blood to flow to the baby's lungs and heart. Untreated, the blood pressure in the baby's lungs might increase. The baby's heart might grow larger and get weak.Risk factors for patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) include:A small patent ductus arteriosus might not cause complications. Larger, untreated defects could cause:It may be possible to have a successful pregnancy with a small patent ductus arteriosus. However, having a large PDA or complications such as heart failure, irregular heartbeats or lung damage increases the risk of serious complications during pregnancy.Before becoming pregnant, talk to your health care provider about possible pregnancy risks and complications. Some heart medicines can cause serious problems for a developing baby. Your health care provider may stop or change your medicines before you become pregnant.Together you can discuss and plan for any special care needed during pregnancy. If you are at high risk of having a baby with a heart problem present at birth, genetic testing and screening may be done during pregnancy.There is no known prevention for patent ductus arteriosus. However, it's important to do everything possible to have a healthy pregnancy. Here are some of the basics:Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart & Blood Health support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.346 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 58 Replies Thu, Jun 20, 2024 106 Replies Wed, Jun 19, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Premature birth.Family history and other genetic conditions.German measles during pregnancy.Being born at a high altitude.Being female.High blood pressure in the lungs, also called pulmonary hypertension.Heart failure.Heart infection, called endocarditis.Seek early prenatal care, even before you're pregnant.Eat a healthy diet.Exercise regularly.Don't drink or smoke.Get recommended vaccines.Control blood sugar.Advertising & Sponsorship