A patent foramen ovale (PFO) is a hole in the heart that didn't close the way it should after birth. The hole is a small flaplike opening between the upper heart chambers. The upper chambers of the heart are called the atria.As a baby grows in the womb, an opening called the foramen ovale (foh-RAY-mun oh-VAY-lee) sits between the upper heart chambers. It typically closes during infancy. When the foramen ovale doesn't close, it's called a patent foramen ovale.Most people never need treatment for patent foramen ovale. Patent foramen ovale occurs in about 1 in 4 people. Most people with the condition never know they have it. A patent foramen ovale is often discovered during tests for other health problems.It's unclear why the foramen ovale stays open in some people. Genetics may play a role. A typical heart has two upper and two lower chambers. The upper chambers, the right and left atria, receive incoming blood. The lower chambers, the more muscular right and left ventricles, pump blood out of the heart. The heart valves, which keep blood flowing in the right direction, are gates at the chamber openings. A patent foramen ovale is a small, flaplike opening in the wall between the upper chambers of the heart. It usually causes no symptoms and rarely requires treatment. To understand more about patent foramen ovale, it may be helpful to know how the heart typically works.The typical heart has four chambers that pump blood:Because a baby in the womb isn't breathing, the lungs aren't working yet. That means there's no need to pump blood to the lungs. At this stage, blood goes around the baby's lungs. It uses the placenta and umbilical cord to move oxygen-rich blood from the mother to the baby's body.In the baby's body, blood vessels connect to the umbilical cord. Oxygen-rich blood gets to the heart through the vein that drains blood from the body to the right upper heart chamber. This vein is called the inferior vena cava. The blood then goes across the foramen ovale and into the left upper heart chamber. Finally, the blood enters the left lower heart chamber, which pumps it throughout the body.When a baby's lungs begin working, blood flow through the heart changes. Now the oxygen-rich blood comes from the lungs and enters the left upper heart chamber.The pressure of the blood pumping through the heart usually forces the flap opening of the foramen ovale to close. In most people, the opening closes sometime during infancy.A patent foramen ovale, also called a patent foramen ovale (PFO) usually doesn't cause complications. Some people with a PFO may have other heart defectsPossible complications of patent foramen ovale may include:Some studies have found that patent foramen ovales (PFOs) are more common in people with unexplained strokes and migraines with aura. But more research is needed. Usually, there are other reasons for these conditions. It's often just a coincidence a person also has a PFO.Oct 25, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.