This shows a child's tumor that likely began in the brain cells. As the tumor grows, it can create pressure on the surrounding brain tissue. This causes brain tumor symptoms, such as headaches, nausea and balance problems.Pediatric brain tumors are growths of cells that start in or near the brain in children. The growths, called tumors, can grow to press on nearby parts of the brain. This can cause symptoms, such as headaches and nausea.Many types of pediatric brain tumors exist. Some grow quickly, and some grow slowly. Some are cancerous, and some aren't cancerous. Noncancerous brain tumors also are called benign brain tumors.The type of brain tumor a child has helps determine the best treatment plan. Other things your child's healthcare team considers include the tumor's location, whether it has spread beyond the brain, and your child's age and overall health.Treatment for brain tumors in children is often quite different from treatment for adult brain tumors. For this reason, seek out care at a medical center that has experience caring for children with brain tumors.Pediatric brain tumor symptoms may vary depending on the tumor's location within the brain. Symptoms also might depend on the size of the tumor and how quickly it's growing.Some of the more common signs and symptoms of pediatric brain tumors include:Other possible signs and symptoms include:Make an appointment with your child's doctor or other healthcare professional if your child has symptoms that worry you.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and receive the latest on brain tumor treatment, diagnosis and surgery.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You will receive the first brain tumor email in your inbox shortly, which will include information on treatment, diagnosis, surgery and how brain cancer teams at Mayo Clinic approach personalized care.Please, try again in a couple of minutesMost of the time, the cause of a pediatric brain tumor isn't known.Pediatric brain tumors start when cells in the brain develop changes in their DNA. A cell's DNA holds the instructions that tell a cell what to do. In healthy cells, the DNA gives instructions to grow and multiply at a set rate. The instructions tell the cells to die at a set time. In tumor cells, the DNA changes give different instructions. The changes tell the tumor cells to make many more cells quickly. Tumor cells can keep living when healthy cells would die. This causes too many cells.The extra cells might form a mass called a tumor. A tumor can grow and press on nearby brain tissue. Sometimes a growing tumor causes swelling and other changes in the nearby brain tissue.Some tumor cells develop other DNA changes that turn them into cancer cells. Cancer cells can invade and destroy healthy tissue. Sometimes cancer cells can break away and spread beyond the brain. If brain cancer spreads, it tends to go to the fluid that surrounds the brain and spinal cord. This fluid is called cerebrospinal fluid.Factors that may increase the risk of pediatric brain tumors include:Brain tumors can happen at any age. In children, brain tumors tend to happen more often in those younger than 5.Children who receive radiation therapy treatments to the head have an increased risk of brain tumors. For example, radiation therapy for one type of brain tumor may increase the risk of developing another type of brain tumor.If the body's germ-fighting immune system is weakened by medicines or illness, there might be a higher risk of pediatric brain tumors. Children with weakened immune systems include those taking medicines to control their immune systems, such as after organ transplant. Certain medical conditions, such as infection with HIV, can weaken the immune system.Some genetic syndromes that run in families can increase the risk of brain tumors in children. Examples include:Tests of your child's DNA can show whether these syndromes are present.There's no way to prevent pediatric brain tumors. If your child develops a brain tumor, you didn't do anything to cause it.Pediatric brain tumors care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Adolescent & Young Adult (AYA) Cancer support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.4 Replies Tue, Jun 04, 2024 1 Replies Tue, Jun 04, 2024 3 Replies Thu, May 23, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship