Pemphigus is a rare skin disorder characterized by blistering of your skin and mucous membranes. The most common type is pemphigus vulgaris, which involves painful sores and blisters on your skin and in your mouth.Pemphigus foliaceus doesn't usually affect mucous membranes. The blisters, which usually begin on your face and scalp and later erupt on your chest and back, usually aren't painful. They tend to be crusty and itchy.Pemphigus is a disease that causes blisters and sores on the skin or mucous membranes, such as in the mouth or on the genitals.Pemphigus can occur at any age, but it's most often seen in people who are middle-aged or older. It tends to be a long-lasting (chronic) condition, and some types can be life-threatening without treatment. Treatment with medication usually controls it.Pemphigus causes blisters on your skin and mucous membranes. The blisters rupture easily, leaving open sores, which may ooze and become infected.The signs and symptoms of two common types of pemphigus are as follows:Pemphigus is distinct from bullous pemphigoid, which is a blistering skin condition that affects older adults and may cause death.See your doctor if you have blisters inside your mouth or on your skin that don't heal.Pemphigus is an autoimmune disorder. Normally, your immune system produces antibodies to fight off harmful invaders, such viruses and bacteria. But in pemphigus, the body produces antibodies that damage cells of your skin and mucous membranes.Pemphigus isn't contagious. In most cases, it's unknown what triggers the disease.Rarely, pemphigus is triggered by the use of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, penicillamine and other drugs.Your risk of pemphigus increases if you're middle-aged or older. The condition tends to be more common in people of Middle Eastern or Jewish descent.Possible complications of pemphigus include:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Pemphigus vulgaris.Pemphigus foliaceus.Advertising & Sponsorship