Peritonitis is a serious condition that starts in the abdomen. That's the area of the body between the chest and the pelvis. Peritonitis happens when the thin layer of tissue inside the abdomen becomes inflamed. The tissue layer is called the peritoneum. Peritonitis usually happens due to an infection from bacteria or fungi.There are two types of peritonitis:It's important to get treatment fast for peritonitis. Health care providers have ways to clear out the infection. They also can treat any medical problem that might be causing it. Peritonitis treatment usually involves medicines that are used for infections caused by bacteria, called antibiotics. Some people with peritonitis need surgery. If you don't get treatment, peritonitis can lead to a serious infection that spreads through the body. It can be deadly.A common cause of peritonitis is a treatment for kidney failure called peritoneal dialysis. This treatment helps get rid of waste products from the blood when the kidneys struggle to do that job themselves. If you get peritoneal dialysis, you can help prevent peritonitis with good hygiene before, during and after dialysis. For example, it's important to wash your hands and clean the skin around your catheter.Symptoms of peritonitis include:If you get peritoneal dialysis, peritonitis symptoms also may include:Peritonitis can be life-threatening if you don't get treatment quickly. Call your health care provider right away if you have severe pain or tenderness of your abdomen, bloating or a feeling of fullness along with:If you get peritoneal dialysis, call your health care provider right away if your dialysis fluid:Peritonitis also might happen after a burst appendix or a serious injury to your abdomenThere is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesPeritoneum infection is usually caused by a hole in an organ in the abdomen, such as the stomach and colon. The hole is also called a rupture. It's rare for peritonitis to happen for other causes.Common causes of a hole that leads to peritonitis include:Peritonitis that happens without a hole or tear is called spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. It's usually a complication of liver disease, such as cirrhosis. Advanced cirrhosis causes a lot of fluid buildup in your abdomen. That fluid buildup could lead to a bacterial infection.Some things that raise the risk of peritonitis are:Without treatment, peritonitis may cause a whole-body infection called sepsis. Sepsis is very dangerous. It can cause shock, organ failure and death.Peritonitis that's linked with peritoneal dialysis is often caused by germs around the catheter. If you use peritoneal dialysis, take these steps to prevent peritonitis:Your health care provider may prescribe antibiotics to prevent peritonitis, especially if you've had peritonitis before. Antibiotics also might be prescribed if you have a buildup of peritoneal fluid due to a medical condition such as liver cirrhosis. If you take medicine called a proton pump inhibitor, you may be asked to stop taking it.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis.Secondary peritonitis.Get medical help right awayCall 911 or get emergency medical careMedical procedures A ruptured appendix, stomach ulcer or hole in the colon.Pancreatitis.Diverticulitis.Trauma.Peritoneal dialysis.Other medical conditions.History of peritonitis.Advertising & Sponsorship