Peripheral neuropathy happens when the nerves that are located outside of the brain and spinal cord (peripheral nerves) are damaged. This condition often causes weakness, numbness and pain, usually in the hands and feet. It also can affect other areas and body functions including digestion and urination.The peripheral nervous system sends information from the brain and spinal cord, also called the central nervous system, to the rest of the body through motor nerves. The peripheral nerves also send sensory information to the central nervous system through sensory nerves.Peripheral neuropathy can result from traumatic injuries, infections, metabolic problems, inherited causes and exposure to toxins. One of the most common causes of neuropathy is diabetes.People with peripheral neuropathy usually describe the pain as stabbing, burning or tingling. Sometimes symptoms get better, especially if caused by a condition that can be treated. Medicines can reduce the pain of peripheral neuropathy.Every nerve in the peripheral system has a specific job. Symptoms depend on the type of nerves affected. Nerves are divided into:Symptoms of peripheral neuropathy might include:If autonomic nerves are affected, symptoms might include:Peripheral neuropathy can affect one nerve, called mononeuropathy. If it affects two or more nerves in different areas, it's called multiple mononeuropathy, and if it affects many nerves, it's called polyneuropathy. Carpal tunnel syndrome is an example of mononeuropathy. Most people with peripheral neuropathy have polyneuropathy.Seek medical care right away if you notice unusual tingling, weakness, or pain in your hands or feet. Early diagnosis and treatment give you the best chance for controlling your symptoms and preventing further damage to your peripheral nerves.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesPeripheral neuropathy is nerve damage caused by several different conditions. Health conditions that can cause peripheral neuropathy include:Other causes of neuropathies include:In some cases, no cause can be identified. This is called idiopathic peripheral neuropathy.Peripheral neuropathy risk factors include:Complications of peripheral neuropathy can include:The best way to prevent peripheral neuropathy is to manage medical conditions that put you at risk.These habits support your nerve health:Peripheral neuropathy care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Autoimmune diseases.Diabetes and metabolic syndrome.Infections.Inherited disorders.Tumors.Bone marrow disorders.Other diseases.Alcohol use disorder.Exposure to poisons.Medicines.Injury or pressure on the nerve.Low vitamin levels.Burns, skin injuries and wounds on the feet.Infection.Falls.Eat a diet rich in fruits, vegetables, whole grains and lean protein to keep nerves healthy.Exercise regularly.Avoid factors that may cause nerve damage.Advertising & Sponsorship