Peripheral nerves send messages from the brain and spinal cord to the rest of the body. They help do things such as move the body's muscles for walking and sense that the feet are cold. Peripheral nerves are made of fibers called axons that are insulated by surrounding tissues.Peripheral nerves are fragile and easily damaged. A nerve injury can affect the brain's ability to communicate with muscles and organs. Damage to the peripheral nerves is called peripheral neuropathy.It's important to get medical care for a peripheral nerve injury as soon as possible. Early diagnosis and treatment may prevent complications and permanent damage.With a peripheral nerve injury, symptoms may range from mild to serious, limiting your daily activities. Your symptoms often depend on which nerve fibers are damaged:Many peripheral nerve injuries affect more than one type of nerve fiber, so you may experience a range of symptoms.If you experience weakness, tingling, numbness or a total loss of feeling, see your healthcare professional to find out the cause. It's important to treat peripheral nerve injuries early.Peripheral nerves can be damaged in several ways:Other causes include narrowing of the arteries, changes in hormone balance and tumors.People who experience physical trauma or play sports may be at higher risk of an injury that can stretch or crush peripheral nerves. People with certain medical conditions also may be at higher risk of peripheral nerve injuries. These conditions, especially diabetes, may put nerves at greater risk of compression.Peripheral nerve injuries care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Motor nerves.Sensory nerves.Autonomic (aw-tuh-NOM-ik) nerves.Advertising & Sponsorship