Pericardial effusion (per-e-KAHR-dee-ul uh-FU-zhun) is the buildup of too much fluid in the double-layered, saclike structure around the heart (pericardium).The space between these layers typically contains a thin layer of fluid. But if the pericardium is diseased or injured, the resulting inflammation can lead to excess fluid. Fluid can also build up around the heart without inflammation, such as from bleeding, related to a cancer or after chest trauma.Pericardial effusion can put pressure on the heart, affecting how the heart works. If untreated, it may lead to heart failure or death in extreme cases.Pericardial effusion may not cause any noticeable signs and symptoms, particularly if the fluid has increased slowly.If pericardial effusion signs and symptoms do occur, they might include:Call 911 or your local emergency number if you feel chest pain that lasts more than a few minutes, if your breathing is difficult or painful, or if you have an unexplained fainting spell.See your health care provider if you have shortness of breath.Pericardial effusion can result from inflammation of the pericardium (pericarditis) after an illness or injury. In some settings, large effusions may be caused by certain cancers. A blockage of pericardial fluids or a collection of blood within the pericardium also can lead to this condition.Sometimes the cause can't be determined (idiopathic pericarditis).Causes of pericardial effusion may include:A potential complication of pericardial effusion is cardiac tamponade (tam-pon-AYD). In this condition, the excess fluid within the pericardium puts pressure on the heart. The strain prevents the heart chambers from filling completely with blood.Cardiac tamponade results in poor blood flow and a lack of oxygen to the body. Cardiac tamponade is life-threatening and requires emergency medical treatment.Nov 13, 2021CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.