The heart on the left shows the typical outer lining of the heart (pericardium). The heart on the right shows a swollen and infected lining (pericarditis).Pericarditis is swelling and irritation of the thin, saclike tissue surrounding the heart. This tissue is called the pericardium. Pericarditis often causes sharp chest pain. The chest pain occurs when the irritated layers of the pericardium rub against each other.Pericarditis often is mild. It may go away without treatment. Treatment for more-serious symptoms can include medicines and, very rarely, surgery. When healthcare professionals find and treat pericarditis early, that may help lower the risk of long-term complications from pericarditis.Chest pain is the most common symptom of pericarditis. It usually feels sharp or stabbing. But some people have dull, achy or pressure-like chest pain.Most often, pericarditis pain is felt behind the breastbone or on the left side of the chest. The pain may:Other symptoms of pericarditis can include:The specific symptoms depend on the type of pericarditis. Pericarditis is grouped into different categories, according to the pattern of symptoms and how long symptoms last.Get medical care right away if you have new symptoms of chest pain.Many of the symptoms of pericarditis are like those of other heart and lung conditions. It's important to be thoroughly checked by a healthcare professional if you have any type of chest pain.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe cause of pericarditis is often hard to determine. A cause may not be found. When this happens, it's called idiopathic pericarditis.Pericarditis causes can include:When pericarditis is found and treated early, the risk of complications usually becomes lower. Complications of pericarditis can include:There's no specific way to prevent pericarditis. But you can take these steps to prevent infections, which might help lower the risk of heart inflammation:Pericarditis care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart & Blood Health support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.346 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 58 Replies Thu, Jun 20, 2024 106 Replies Wed, Jun 19, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Acute pericarditisRecurrent pericarditisIncessant pericarditisChronic constrictive pericarditisFluid buildup around the heart, also called pericardial effusion.Thickening and scarring of the heart lining, also called constrictive pericarditis.Pressure on the heart due to fluid buildup, also called cardiac tamponade.Stay away from people who have a viral or flu-like illnessFollow good hygiene.Get recommended vaccines.Advertising & Sponsorship