Persistent post-concussive symptoms — also called post-concussion syndrome — occurs when symptoms of a mild traumatic brain injury last longer than expected after an injury. These symptoms may include headaches, dizziness, and problems with concentration and memory. They can last weeks to months.A mild traumatic brain injury is known as a concussion. It could happen as a result of a fall or auto accident, while playing contact sports, or from violent shaking and movement of the head or body.You don't have to lose consciousness to get a concussion or experience persistent post-concussive symptoms. In fact, the risk of developing the symptoms doesn't appear to be linked with the severity of the injury.In most people, symptoms appear within the first 7 to 10 days and go away within three months. But sometimes they can last for a year or more. The goal of treatment is to manage symptoms.Persistent post-concussive symptoms include:Headaches after a concussion most often feel like tension-type headaches. These may be related to a neck injury that happened at the same time as the head injury. Or the headaches may feel like migraines.See a health care provider if you experience a head injury that causes confusion or memory loss — even if you remained conscious.If a concussion occurs while playing a sport, don't go back into the game. Seek medical attention so that the injury doesn't become worse.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesMore research is needed to better understand how and why persistent post-concussive symptoms happen after some injuries and not others.Persistent post-concussive symptoms may develop as a result of the impact of the injury itself. Or persistent post-concussive symptoms may trigger other conditions such as migraines. Symptoms also may be associated with other factors, including trouble with sleep, dizziness, stress and problems with mental health. Your health care provider will work with you to understand the cause of the current symptoms and the treatments that are recommended.Risk factors for developing persistent post-concussive symptoms include:The only known way to prevent persistent post-concussive symptoms is to avoid a head injury in the first place.Although you can't prepare for every potential situation, here are some tips for avoiding common causes of head injuries:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Age.Sex.Fasten your seat beltBe sure children are in age-appropriate safety seats.Use helmetsTake action at home to prevent falls,Advertising & Sponsorship