Peyronie (pay-roe-NEE) disease is a condition in which fibrous scar tissue forms in the deeper tissues under the skin of the penis. This causes curved, painful erections. It also can make the penis shorter while erect. Peyronie disease is not caused by cancer.Penises vary in shape and size. So having a curved erection isn't always a cause for concern. But Peyronie disease causes a serious bend or pain in some people.This can prevent you from having sex. Or it might make it hard to get or keep an erection, which also is called erectile dysfunction. For many people, Peyronie disease also causes stress and anxiety.Peyronie disease rarely goes away on its own. In most people with the condition, it will remain as is or may get slightly worse early on. Early treatment soon after you get the condition may keep it from getting worse or even improve symptoms. Even if you've had Peyronie disease for some time, treatment may help ease symptoms such as pain, curving and shortening.Peyronie disease symptoms might start suddenly or appear over time. The most common symptoms include:The curving and penile shortening linked with Peyronie disease might become worse over time. Physical changes in the penis often get worse or stay the same during the first year to year and a half.Pain during erections usually gets better within 1 to 2 years. The scar tissue, penile shortening and curving often remain. It's not common, but the curving and pain of Peyronie disease can get better without treatment.See a health care professional if you notice symptoms of Peyronie disease. Early treatment gives you the best chance to improve the condition or keep it from getting worse. If you've had the condition for some time, get a health care checkup if the pain, curving, length, or other changes bother you or your partner.Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your health concerns. Visit Mayo Clinic Men's Health to get started.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Subscribe for free and receive your in-depth guide to digestive health, plus the latest on health innovations and news. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.Your in-depth digestive health guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest health news, research, and care.If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe penis contains two cylinder-shaped, spongelike structures called the corpora cavernosa. During sexual arousal, nerve impulses increase blood flow to both cylinders. This sudden influx of blood causes an erection by expanding, straightening and stiffening the penis.The exact cause of Peyronie disease isn't clear. But various factors seem to be involved.It's thought Peyronie disease most often results from repeated injury to the penis during vigorous sex. But the penis also could be damaged during athletic activities or accidents. Many people with Peyronie disease can't recall a specific injury that led to their symptoms.During the healing process after injury to the penis, scar tissue forms. This can lead to a lump you can feel or to a curve in the penis.Each side of the penis contains a spongelike tube called a corpus cavernosum. These tubes have many tiny blood vessels. Each of the corpora cavernosa is encased in a sheath of elastic tissue called the tunica albuginea (TOO-nih-kuh al-BYOO-JIN-e-uh). The sheath stretches during an erection.When you become sexually aroused, more blood flows to these chambers. As the chambers fill with blood, the penis expands, straightens and stiffens into an erection.In Peyronie disease, when the penis becomes erect, the area with the scar tissue doesn't stretch. As a result, the penis bends or goes through other changes. This can be painful.In most people, Peyronie disease symptoms come on slowly and don't seem to be linked with an injury. Researchers are looking into whether Peyronie disease might be tied to a genetic trait or certain health conditions.Minor injury to the penis doesn't always lead to Peyronie disease. Various factors can contribute to poor wound healing and scar tissue buildup that might play a role in Peyronie disease. These include:Other factors might be linked to Peyronie disease. These include certain health conditions, smoking and some types of prostate surgery.Peyronie disease might lead to troubles that include:Our caring team of Mayo Clinic experts can help you with your health concerns. Visit Mayo Clinic Men's Health to get started.Peyronie disease care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Scar tissue.A bend to the penis.Erection problems.Shortening of the penis.Pain in the penis.Other changes in how the penis looks.Family history.Connective tissue diseases.Age.Advertising & Sponsorship