A pilonidal cyst is an unusual pocket in the skin that usually contains hair and skin debris. A pilonidal cyst is almost always near the tailbone at the top of the buttocks.A pilonidal (pie-low-NIE-dul) cyst is an unusual pocket in the skin that usually contains hair and skin debris. The cyst is almost always near the tailbone at the top of the buttocks.Pilonidal cysts usually occur when hair punctures the skin and then becomes embedded. If a pilonidal cyst becomes infected, it can be very painful. The cyst can be drained through a small cut in the skin. Sometimes, surgery is needed.Pilonidal cysts are most common in young adult males, and the problem tends to recur. People who sit for long periods of time are at higher risk of developing pilonidal cysts.A pilonidal cyst may not cause symptoms. But if it's infected, the skin around the cyst may be swollen and painful. Symptoms of an infected pilonidal cyst include:If you notice any symptoms of a pilonidal cyst, see your health care provider.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe cause of most pilonidal cysts is loose hairs that puncture the skin. Friction and pressure from rubbed skin, tight clothing, cycling or long periods of sitting can force hair into the skin.The body creates a cyst around the hair to try to push it out. Most pilonidal cysts form on the tailbone. People who groom animals or cut hair can develop a cyst between their fingers.Factors that might increase your risk of a pilonidal cyst include:Some people have pilonidal cysts that become infected again and again over a long time. Without treatment, these people may be at increased risk of a type of skin cancer called squamous cell carcinoma.To help prevent pilonidal cysts, try to:If you've had pilonidal cysts in the past, you might want to regularly shave the affected area or use hair removal products to reduce the risk of a new cyst.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship