A pinched nerve occurs when too much pressure is applied to a nerve by surrounding tissues, such as bones, cartilage, muscles or tendons. This pressure can cause pain, tingling, numbness or weakness. A pinched nerve can occur in many areas of the body. For example, a herniated disk in the lower spine may put pressure on a nerve root. This may cause pain that radiates down the back of the leg. A pinched nerve in the wrist can lead to pain and numbness in the hand and fingers, known as carpal tunnel syndrome.With rest and other conservative treatments, most people recover from a pinched nerve within a few days or weeks. Sometimes, surgery is needed to relieve pain from a pinched nerve.Pinched nerve symptoms include:Symptoms related to a pinched nerve may be worse when you're sleeping.Self-care measures such as rest and pain relievers available without a prescription may resolve the symptoms of a pinched nerve. See your healthcare professional if symptoms last for several days and don't respond to self-care.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesA herniated disk in the lower spine may "pinch" a nerve root. This can cause pain that radiates down the back of the leg, known as sciatica.A pinched median nerve in the wrist can lead to pain, numbness and weakness in the hand and fingers, known as carpal tunnel syndrome.A pinched nerve occurs when too much pressure, known as compression, is applied to a nerve by surrounding tissues.This tissue might be bone or cartilage, such as when a herniated spinal disk compresses a nerve root. Or muscle or tendons may compress a nerve.In carpal tunnel syndrome, a variety of tissues may be responsible for compression of the carpal tunnel's median nerve in the wrist. It can be caused by swollen tendon sheaths within the tunnel, enlarged bone that narrows the tunnel, or a thickened and degenerated ligament.A number of conditions may cause tissue to compress a nerve or nerves, including:If a nerve is pinched for only a short time, there's often no permanent damage. Once the pressure is relieved, nerve function returns. However, if the pressure continues, chronic pain and permanent nerve damage can occur.The following factors may increase your risk of experiencing a pinched nerve:Other risk factors include:The following measures may help you prevent a pinched nerve:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Sex assigned at birth.Bone spurs.Rheumatoid arthritis.Thyroid disease.Diabetes.Overuse.Obesity.Pregnancy.Prolonged bed rest.Maintain good positioning.Incorporate strength and flexibility exercisesLimit repetitive activitiesMaintain a healthy weightAdvertising & Sponsorship