Pituitary tumors are tumors that form in the pituitary gland near the brain. These tumors can cause changes in hormone levels. This illustration shows a smaller tumor, called a microadenoma.Pituitary tumors are unusual growths that develop in the pituitary gland. This gland is an organ about the size of a pea. It's located behind the nose at the base of the brain. Some of these tumors cause the pituitary gland to make too much of certain hormones that control important body functions. Others can cause the pituitary gland to make too little of those hormones.Most pituitary tumors are benign. That means they are not cancer. Another name for these noncancerous tumors is pituitary adenomas. Most adenomas stay in the pituitary gland or in the tissue around it, and they grow slowly. They typically don't spread to other parts of the body.Pituitary tumors can be treated in several ways. The tumor may be removed with surgery. Or its growth may be controlled with medications or radiation therapy. Sometimes, hormone levels are managed with medicine. Your health care provider may suggest a combination of these treatments. In some cases, observation — also called a ''wait-and-see'' approach — may be the right choice.Types of pituitary adenomas include:Pituitary tumors are different from pituitary cysts. A cyst is a sac that may be filled with air, fluid or other material. A tumor is an unusual mass of cells that may grow over time. Cysts may form on or near the pituitary gland, but they are not tumors or adenomas.Not all pituitary tumors cause symptoms. Sometimes these tumors are found during an imaging test, such as an MRI or a CT scan, that is done for another reason. If they don't cause symptoms, pituitary tumors usually don't need treatment.Pituitary tumor symptoms may be caused by a tumor putting pressure on the brain or on other parts of the body nearby. Symptoms also can be caused by a hormone imbalance. Hormone levels can rise when a pituitary tumor makes too much of one or more hormones. Or a large tumor that disrupts the way the pituitary gland works may cause hormone levels to fall.Macroadenomas can put pressure on the pituitary gland, on nerves, on the brain and on other parts of the body nearby. That can cause symptoms such as:Without treatment, Cushing syndrome can cause facial roundness, weight gain around the middle body and upper back, thinning of the arms and legs, easy bruising, and stretch marks.Symptoms of acromegaly include an enlarged face and hands. Changes to the face may cause the brow bone and lower jawbone to protrude, and the nose and lips to get larger.Macroadenomas can limit the pituitary gland's ability to make hormones. When that happens, symptoms may include:Functioning pituitary adenomas typically make a large amount of one hormone. That exposes the body to high levels of that hormone. Rarely, a pituitary adenoma may make more than one hormone. The following types of functioning pituitary adenomas cause different symptoms depending on the hormones they make.Pituitary tumors that make adrenocorticotropic hormone are called corticotroph adenomas. Adrenocorticotropic hormone, also called ACTH, causes the adrenal glands to make the hormone cortisol. ACTH tumors trigger the adrenal glands to make too much cortisol. This causes a condition called Cushing disease. Cushing disease is one cause of Cushing syndrome.Cushing disease symptoms include:Pituitary tumors that make growth hormone also are called growth hormone-secreting tumors or somatotroph adenomas. Too much growth hormone leads to a condition known as acromegaly. Acromegaly can cause:Children and teens who have too much growth hormone might also grow faster or taller than usual. This condition is called gigantism.Luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) are also known as gonadotropins. Pituitary tumors that make these hormones are called gonadotroph adenomas.It's uncommon for these adenomas to make too many hormones that then trigger symptoms. Instead, symptoms from these adenomas usually are due to tumor pressure. If symptoms do happen because of too much LH and FSH, they affect women and men differently.Symptoms in women may include:Symptoms in men may include:These adenomas are called prolactinomas. Too much of the hormone prolactin can lead to a decrease in the body's levels of sex hormones — estrogen and testosterone. Too much prolactin affects men and women differently.In women, too much prolactin might cause:In men, too much prolactin can cause a condition called male hypogonadism. Symptoms might include:Pituitary tumors that make thyroid-stimulating hormone are called thyrotroph adenomas. They also may be referred to as thyroid-stimulating hormone-secreting tumors. They cause the thyroid gland to make too much of the hormone thyroxine, also called T-4. That leads to a condition called hyperthyroidism, also known as overactive thyroid disease. Hyperthyroidism can speed up the body's metabolism causing many symptoms. Some of the most common include:If you develop symptoms that might be associated with a pituitary tumor, see your health care provider. Treatment for pituitary tumors often can bring hormones back to a healthy level and ease symptoms.Although rare, some pituitary tumors are hereditary. That means they run in families. In particular, the hereditary disorder multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 1 (MEN 1) can cause pituitary tumors. If MEN 1 runs in your family, talk to your health care provider about tests that may help find a pituitary tumor early.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and receive the latest on brain tumor treatment, diagnosis and surgery.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You will receive the first brain tumor email in your inbox shortly, which will include information on treatment, diagnosis, surgery and how brain cancer teams at Mayo Clinic approach personalized care.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe pituitary gland and the hypothalamus are in the brain. They control hormone production.The pituitary gland is a small organ about the size of a pea. It's located behind the nose at the base of the brain. Despite its small size, the pituitary gland has an effect on nearly every part of the body. The hormones it makes control important body functions, such as growth, blood pressure and reproduction.The cause of uncontrolled cell growth in the pituitary gland, which creates a tumor, remains unknown. In rare cases, pituitary tumors can be caused by genes you've inherited. But most have no clear hereditary cause. Still, scientists think that changes in genes may play an important role in how pituitary tumors develop.Most people who get pituitary tumors don't have any factors that put them at higher risk of developing these tumors. Environment and lifestyle choices don't seem to have an effect on a person's risk of pituitary tumors.Although genetics seems to play a role, most people who have pituitary tumors don't have a family history of them.The only known risk factors are several rare hereditary conditions that raise the risk of many health problems, including pituitary tumors. These conditions include:Pituitary tumors usually don't spread to other parts of the body. They can affect a person's health, though. Pituitary tumors may cause:If a pituitary tumor presses on part of the brain called the medial temporal lobe, it may lead to a seizure. This type of seizure is known as a focal seizure with impaired awareness. These seizures involve a change in or loss of consciousness or awareness. If you have one of these seizures, you may seem to be awake. But you stare into space and don't respond as you typically would to the environment around you. You may not remember the seizure after it happens.Having a pituitary tumor or having one removed with surgery may permanently change your body's hormone supply. As a result, you may need hormone replacement therapy for the rest of your life.A rare but potentially serious complication of a pituitary tumor is pituitary apoplexy. This happens when there is sudden bleeding into the tumor. Symptoms include:Pituitary apoplexy requires emergency treatment. The treatment usually includes taking corticosteroid medicine to ease swelling around the tumor. You also may need surgery to remove the tumor.Pituitary tumors care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Brain Tumor support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.172 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 1 Replies Tue, Jun 04, 2024 6 Replies Sun, May 26, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Functioning.Adrenocorticotropic hormone.Growth hormone.Luteinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone.Prolactin.Thyroid-stimulating hormone.Nonfunctioning.Macroadenomas.Microadenomas.Advertising & Sponsorship