Polymyalgia rheumatica is an inflammatory disorder that causes muscle pain and stiffness, especially in the shoulders and hips. Signs and symptoms of polymyalgia rheumatica (pol-e-my-AL-juh rue-MAT-ih-kuh) usually begin quickly and are worse in the morning.Most people who develop polymyalgia rheumatica are older than 65. It rarely affects people under 50.This condition is related to another inflammatory condition called giant cell arteritis. Giant cell arteritis can cause headaches, vision difficulties, jaw pain and scalp tenderness. It's possible to have both conditions together.The signs and symptoms of polymyalgia rheumatica usually occur on both sides of the body and might include:You might also have more-general signs and symptoms, including:See your doctor if you have aches, pains or stiffness that:The exact cause of polymyalgia rheumatica is unknown. Two factors appear to be involved in the development of this condition:Polymyalgia rheumatica and another disease known as giant cell arteritis share many similarities. Many people who have one of these diseases also have symptoms of the other.Giant cell arteritis results in inflammation in the lining of the arteries, most often the arteries in the temples. Signs and symptoms include headaches, jaw pain, vision problems and scalp tenderness. If left untreated, this condition can lead to stroke or blindness.Risk factors for polymyalgia rheumatica include:Symptoms of polymyalgia rheumatica can greatly affect your ability to perform everyday activities, such as:These difficulties can affect your health, social interactions, physical activity, sleep and general well-being.Jun 16, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.