In polyhydramnios, increased levels of amniotic fluid accumulates in the uterus during pregnancy. Mild cases of polyhydramnios may go away on their own. Severe cases may require treatment.Polyhydramnios (pol-e-hi-DRAM-nee-os) is the buildup of increased amniotic fluid — the fluid that surrounds the baby in the uterus during pregnancy. Polyhydramnios happens in about 1% to 2% of pregnancies.Most of the time, the condition is mild. It's often found during the middle or later stages of pregnancy. Severe polyhydramnios may cause shortness of breath, preterm labor or other symptoms.If you learn that you have polyhydramnios, your health care team carefully tracks your pregnancy to help prevent health problems. Treatment depends on how serious the condition is. Mild polyhydramnios may go away on its own. Severe polyhydramnios may need to be watched more closely by your care team.Polyhydramnios symptoms may be linked with the buildup of amniotic fluid creating pressure within the uterus and on nearby organs. Mild polyhydramnios often causes few or no symptoms. But serious forms of the condition may cause:Your health care professional also may also suspect polyhydramnios if your uterus has become large for the number of weeks of pregnancy.Some of the known causes of polyhydramnios include:Often, the cause of polyhydramnios isn't clear, especially when the condition is mild.Risk factors for polyhydramnios include certain conditions that develop during pregnancy, such as gestational diabetes. A condition that affects the developing baby, such as a problem with the digestive tract, central nervous system or other organs, may also put you at risk of polyhydramnios.Polyhydramnios is linked with:Greater health problems usually are linked with severe polyhydramnios.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship