A popliteal artery aneurysm is an irregular bulge that occurs in the wall of the artery located behind the knee joint. It is a type of lower extremity aneurysm.You might not notice any symptoms. The first symptom may be pain in the lower leg that occurs with walking, called claudication. Other symptoms of a popliteal artery aneurysm include:An aneurysm is a ballooning in a weak spot in an artery wall. Many different things can cause the popliteal artery wall to become weak, including:Popliteal artery aneurysms are rare. They are more common in men than in women.Popliteal artery aneurysm often occurs in men with abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA). An abdominal aortic aneurysm is a swelling of the wall of the body's main artery, called the aorta. Anyone diagnosed with popliteal artery aneurysm should be screened for AAA.Other risk factors for popliteal artery aneurysm include:Complications of popliteal artery aneurysm include blood clots. Blood clots can cause a severe lack of blood flow in the lower leg.A severe lack of blood flow can cause the following symptoms:A severe lack of blood flow may result in loss of the limb. Rarely, the aneurysm may rupture. But the risk of popliteal artery aneurysm rupture is low.Smoking and high blood pressure increase the risk of blood vessel problems that can lead to popliteal artery and other aneurysms. Following a heart-healthy lifestyle can help prevent heart disease and blood vessel damage.Try these heart-healthy tips:Popliteal artery aneurysm care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart & Blood Health support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.346 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 58 Replies Thu, Jun 20, 2024 106 Replies Wed, Jun 19, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship