Popliteal artery entrapment syndrome (PAES) is an uncommon condition that affects the main artery behind the knee. That artery is called the popliteal artery. In this condition, the calf muscle is in the wrong position or it's larger than usual. The muscle presses on the artery. The artery becomes trapped, making it harder for blood to flow to the lower leg and foot.Popliteal artery entrapment syndrome is most common among athletes.The main symptom of popliteal artery entrapment syndrome (PAES) is pain or cramping in the back of the lower leg. The back of the lower leg is called the calf. The pain occurs during exercise and goes away with rest. Other symptoms may include:If the nearby vein, called the popliteal vein, also becomes trapped by the calf muscle, you may have:Symptoms typically affect young, otherwise healthy people under age 40.Make an appointment for a health checkup if you have any type of leg pain. This is especially important if you have calf or foot cramping during activity that gets better with rest.Popliteal artery entrapment syndrome (PAES) is caused by an irregular calf muscle, usually the gastrocnemius muscle.The condition may be seen at birth, or it may occur later in life. When it's present at birth, the baby's calf muscle or nearby artery forms in the wrong place during pregnancy. People who get the condition later in life have a calf muscle that is bigger than usual.The changes in the calf muscle cause it to press on the main artery behind the knee. This reduces blood flow to the lower leg. The lack of blood flow causes pain and cramping in the back of the lower leg during times of activity.Popliteal artery entrapment syndrome (PAES) is uncommon. The following things increase the risk of the condition.Long-term pressure on the popliteal artery can cause the artery to narrow. This is called artery stenosis. It can cause pain and cramping with just slight activity, such as walking.In severe cases or when undiagnosed, the nerves and muscles in the leg can become damaged. Blood clots may occur in the lower leg. Older athletes with symptoms of popliteal artery entrapment syndrome should be checked for a ballooning or bulging of the artery. This is called a popliteal aneurysm. It is common in older men.Popliteal artery entrapment care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Younger age.Being male.Strenuous athletic activity.Advertising & Sponsorship