Posterior cortical atrophy is a brain and nervous system syndrome that causes brain cells to die over time. It causes problems with eyesight and with processing visual information.Common symptoms include trouble reading, judging distances and reaching for objects. People with the syndrome may not be able to recognize objects and familiar faces. They also may have trouble making calculations. Over time this condition may cause a decline in memory and thinking abilities, known as cognitive skills.Posterior cortical atrophy causes the loss of brain cells in back of the brain. This is the region responsible for visual processing and spatial reasoning. This changes a person's ability to process visual and spatial information.In more than 80% of cases, posterior cortical atrophy is due to Alzheimer's disease. However, it can be due to other neurological conditions such as Lewy body dementia or corticobasal degeneration.Posterior cortical atrophy symptoms vary among people. Symptoms also can vary over time. They tend to gradually get worse. Common symptoms include having trouble with:Other common symptoms include:Memory problems may occur later in the disease.The most common cause of posterior cortical atrophy is a form of Alzheimer's disease that's not typical. It affects the back of the brain. Other less common causes include corticobasal degeneration, Lewy body dementia and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Researchers are looking at potential gene variations that may be related to the condition.Further study is needed to determine whether the risk factors for Alzheimer's disease may play a role in posterior cortical atrophy.Posterior cortical atrophy care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship