Precocious puberty is when children's bodies begin to change into adult bodies too soon. This change is known as puberty. Most of the time, puberty occurs after age 8 in girls and after age 9 in boys. However, Black, Hispanic, and Native American children might naturally reach puberty earlier. Precocious puberty is when puberty begins too early for the child who's going through it.In puberty, muscles and bones grow quickly. Bodies change shape and size. And the body becomes able to have children.The cause of precocious puberty often can't be found. Rarely, certain conditions, such as infections, hormone issues, tumors, brain issues or injuries, may cause precocious puberty. Treatment for precocious puberty usually includes medicines to delay puberty.Precocious puberty symptoms include:Make an appointment with your child's health care provider if your child has symptoms of precocious puberty.To understand the causes of precocious puberty in some children, it's helpful to know what happens at puberty. The brain starts the process by making a hormone called gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH).When this hormone reaches the small, bean-shaped gland at the base of the brain, called the pituitary gland, it leads to more estrogen in the ovaries and more testosterone in the testicles. Estrogen makes female sex traits. Testosterone makes male sex traits.There are two types of precocious puberty: central precocious puberty and peripheral precocious puberty.The cause of this type of precocious puberty often isn't known.With central precocious puberty, puberty starts too soon but develops as usual. For most children with this condition, there's no medical problem or other known reason for the early puberty.In rare cases, the following can cause central precocious puberty:Estrogen or testosterone being made too soon causes this type of precocious puberty.With this type of precocious puberty, the hormone in the brain (GnRH) that typically causes puberty to start isn't involved. Instead, the cause is the release of estrogen or testosterone into the body. A problem with the ovaries, testicles, adrenal glands or pituitary gland causes the hormone release.The following can lead to peripheral precocious puberty:In girls, peripheral precocious puberty also might be linked to:In boys, peripheral precocious puberty also might be caused by:Factors that increase the risk of precocious puberty include:Possible complications of precocious puberty include:No one can avoid some of the risk factors for precocious puberty, such as sex and race. But there are things that can lower children's chances of precocious puberty, including:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Being a girl.Being obese.Short height.Social and emotional problems.Advertising & Sponsorship