A premature birth means a baby is born too early. The birth takes place before the 37th week of pregnancy. A typical pregnancy lasts about 40 weeks.Premature babies often have serious health problems, especially when they're born very early. These problems often vary. But the earlier a baby is born, the higher the risk of health challenges.A newborn can be:Most premature births happen in the late preterm stage.Your baby may have very mild symptoms of premature birth or more-serious health problems.Some signs of being born too early include:The following tables show the median birth weight, length and head circumference of premature babies at different gestational ages for each sex.If you give birth to a preterm baby, your baby will likely need to stay in a special nursery unit at the hospital. Some infants need to spend time in a unit that cares for them and closely tracks their health day and night. This is called a neonatal intensive care unit (NICU).A step down from the NICU is an intermediate care nursery, which provides less intensive care. Special nursery units are staffed with health care providers and a team that's trained to help preterm babies.Your baby may need extra help feeding and adapting right after delivery. Your health care team can help you understand what's needed and what your baby's care plan will be. Feel free to ask them questions.Often, the exact cause of premature birth isn't clear. But certain things can raise the risk.Some risk factors linked to past and present pregnancies include:Some health problems can raise the risk of premature birth, such as:Lifestyle choices also can raise the risk of a preterm pregnancy, such as:For unknown reasons, Black and Native people in the United States are more likely to have premature births than are women of other races. But premature birth can happen to anyone. In fact, many preterm births have no known risk factors.Not all premature babies have health complications. But being born too early can cause short-term and long-term medical problems. In general, the earlier a baby is born, the higher the risk of complications. Birth weight plays a key role too.Some problems may be clear at birth. Others may not show up until later.In the first weeks, the complications of premature birth may include:Breathing problems. A premature baby may have trouble breathing due to being born with lungs that aren't fully developed. If the baby's lungs lack a substance that allows the lungs to expand, the baby may have trouble getting enough air. This is a treatable problem called respiratory distress syndrome.It's common for preterm babies to have pauses in their breathing called apnea. Most infants outgrow apnea by the time they go home from the hospital. Some premature babies get a less common lung disorder called bronchopulmonary dysplasia. They need oxygen for a few weeks or months, but they often outgrow this problem.Temperature control problems. Premature babies can lose body heat quickly. They don't have the stored body fat of a full-term infant. And they can't make enough heat to counter what's lost through the surface of their bodies. If body temperature drops too low, it can lead to a dangerous problem called hypothermia.Hypothermia in a premature baby can lead to breathing problems and low blood sugar levels. A preterm infant also may use up all of the energy gained from feedings just to stay warm. That's why smaller premature babies need extra heat from a warmer or an incubator at first.Over the long term, premature birth may lead to health problems such as:The exact cause of preterm birth is often unknown. But some things can be done to help lower the risk of preterm birth, including:Cervical cerclage. This is a surgery that's done during pregnancy. Your provider may suggest it if you have a short cervix and you've had a preterm birth before.During this procedure, the cervix is stitched closed with a strong suture. This may give the uterus extra support. The suture is removed when it's time to have the baby. Ask your provider if you need to stay away from vigorous activity during the rest of your pregnancy. One thing that doesn't help prevent preterm birth is staying in bed. Bed rest can raise the risk of blood clots, weaker bones and less muscle strength. It might even make preterm birth more likely.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Late preterm,Moderately preterm,Very preterm,Extremely preterm,Breathing problems.Heart problems.Brain problems.Temperature control problems.Digestive problems.Blood problems.Metabolism problems.Immune system problems.Cerebral palsy.Trouble learning.Vision problems.Hearing problems.Dental problems.Behavior and mental health problems.Ongoing health issues.Taking progesterone supplements.Cervical cerclage.Advertising & Sponsorship