Priapism is a prolonged erection of the penis. The full or partial erection continues hours beyond or isn't caused by sexual stimulation. The main types of priapism are ischemic and nonischemic. Ischemic priapism is a medical emergency.Although priapism is an uncommon condition overall, it occurs commonly in certain groups, such as people who have sickle cell disease. Prompt treatment for priapism is usually needed to prevent tissue damage that could result in the inability to get or maintain an erection (erectile dysfunction).Priapism most commonly affects males in their 30s and older, but can begin in childhood for males with sickle cell disease.Priapism symptoms vary depending on the type of priapism. The two main types of priapism are ischemic priapism and nonischemic priapism.Ischemic priapism, also called low-flow priapism, is the result of blood not being able to leave the penis. Blood is trapped in the penis because it cannot flow out of the veins of the penis or there is a problem with the contraction of smooth muscles within the erectile tissue of the penis. Ischemic priapism is the more common type of priapism and requires immediate medical care to prevent complications caused by not getting enough oxygen to the penile tissue.Signs and symptoms include:Stuttering priapism — also called recurrent or intermittent priapism — is a form of ischemic priapism. An uncommon condition, stuttering priapism describes repetitive episodes of prolonged erections and often includes episodes of ischemic priapism. It occurs more often in males who have an inherited disorder characterized by abnormally shaped red blood cells (sickle cell disease). Sickle cells can block the blood vessels in the penis. In some cases, the condition starts off with unwanted and painful erections of short duration and might progress over time to more-frequent and more-prolonged erections. Stuttering priapism may begin in childhood.Nonischemic priapism, also known as high-flow priapism, occurs when blood flow through the arteries of the penis isn't working properly. However, the penile tissues continue to receive some blood flow and oxygen. Nonischemic priapism often occurs due to trauma.Signs and symptoms include:If you have an erection lasting more than four hours, you need emergency care. The emergency room doctor will determine whether you have ischemic priapism or nonischemic priapism.If you experience recurrent, persistent, painful erections that resolve on their own, see your doctor. You might need treatment to prevent further episodes.An erection normally occurs in response to physical or psychological stimulation. This stimulation causes certain smooth muscles to relax, increasing blood flow to spongy tissues in the penis. As a result, the blood-filled penis becomes erect. After stimulation ends, the blood flows out and the penis returns to its nonrigid (flaccid) state.Priapism occurs when some part of this system — the blood, vessels, smooth muscles or nerves — changes normal blood flow, and an erection persists. The underlying cause of priapism often can't be determined, but several conditions may play a role.Blood-related diseases might contribute to priapism — usually ischemic priapism, when blood isn't able to flow out of the penis. These disorders include:The most common associated diagnosis in children is sickle cell disease.Priapism, usually ischemic priapism, is a possible side effect of a number of drugs, including:Alcohol, marijuana, cocaine and other drugs can cause priapism, particularly ischemic priapism.A common cause of nonischemic priapism is trauma or injury to your penis, pelvis, or the region between the base of the penis and the anus (perineum).Other causes of priapism include:Ischemic priapism can cause serious complications. The blood trapped in the penis is deprived of oxygen. When an erection lasts for too long — usually more than four hours — this lack of oxygen can begin to damage or destroy tissues in the penis. Untreated priapism can cause erectile dysfunction.If you have stuttering priapism, to prevent future episodes your doctor might recommend:Aug 31, 2021CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.