Primary ovarian insufficiency occurs when the ovaries stop working as they should before age 40. When this happens, the ovaries don't make the typical amounts of the hormone estrogen or release eggs regularly. The condition often leads to infertility. Another name for primary ovarian insufficiency is premature ovarian insufficiency. It also used to be called premature ovarian failure, but this term isn't used anymore.Sometimes, primary ovarian insufficiency is confused with premature menopause. But they aren't the same. People with primary ovarian insufficiency can have irregular or occasional periods for years. They might even get pregnant. But people with premature menopause stop having periods and can't become pregnant.Treatment can restore estrogen levels in people with primary ovarian insufficiency. This helps prevent some conditions that can happen due to low estrogen, such as heart disease and weak, brittle bones.Symptoms of primary ovarian insufficiency are like those of menopause or low estrogen. They include:If you've missed your period for three months or more, see your health care team to figure out the cause. You can miss your period for many reasons, such as pregnancy, stress, or a change in diet or exercise habits. But it's best to get a health care checkup whenever your menstrual cycle changes.Even if you don't mind not having periods, see a health care professional to find out what's causing the change. Low estrogen levels can lead to a condition that causes weak and brittle bones, called osteoporosis. Low levels of estrogen also can lead to heart disease.Primary ovarian insufficiency may be caused by:Ovulation is the release of an egg from one of the ovaries. It often happens about midway through the menstrual cycle, although the exact timing may vary.In preparation for ovulation, the lining of the uterus, or endometrium, thickens. The pituitary gland in the brain stimulates one of the ovaries to release an egg. The wall of the ovarian follicle ruptures at the surface of the ovary. The egg is released.Finger-like structures called fimbriae sweep the egg into the neighboring fallopian tube. The egg travels through the fallopian tube, propelled in part by contractions in the fallopian tube walls. Here in the fallopian tube, the egg may be fertilized by a sperm.If the egg is fertilized, the egg and sperm unite to form a one-celled entity called a zygote. As the zygote travels down the fallopian tube toward the uterus, it begins dividing rapidly to form a cluster of cells called a blastocyst, which resembles a tiny raspberry. When the blastocyst reaches the uterus, it implants in the lining of the uterus and pregnancy begins.If the egg isn't fertilized, it's simply reabsorbed by the body — perhaps before it even reaches the uterus. About two weeks later, the lining of the uterus sheds through the vagina. This is known as menstruation.Factors that raise the risk of primary ovarian insufficiency include:Primary ovarian insufficiency can lead to other health conditions, including the following:Treatment for primary ovarian insufficiency helps prevent these other health conditions.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Chromosome changes.Toxins.An immune system response to ovarian tissue.Unknown factors.Age.Family history.Ovarian surgery.Infertility.Osteoporosis.Depression or anxiety.Heart or blood vessel disease.Dementia.Parkinson's disease.Advertising & Sponsorship