The bile ducts carry bile from your liver to your small intestine. When bile ducts become damaged, bile can back up into the liver, causing damage to liver cells. This damage can lead to liver failure.Primary biliary cholangitis is an autoimmune disease in which the bile ducts are inflamed and slowly destroyed. It previously was called primary biliary cirrhosis.Bile is a fluid made in the liver. It helps with digestion and absorbing certain vitamins. It also helps the body absorb fats and get rid of cholesterol, toxins and worn-out red blood cells. Ongoing inflammation in the liver can lead to bile duct inflammation and damage known as cholangitis. At times, this can lead to permanent scarring of liver tissue, called cirrhosis. It also can eventually lead to liver failure.Although it affects both sexes, primary biliary cholangitis mostly affects women. It's considered an autoimmune disease, which means your body's immune system is mistakenly attacking healthy cells and tissue. Researchers think a combination of genetic and environmental factors triggers the disease. It usually develops slowly. At this time, there's no cure for primary biliary cholangitis, but medicines may slow liver damage, especially if treatment begins early.More than half of people with primary biliary cholangitis do not have any noticeable symptoms when diagnosed. The disease may be diagnosed when blood tests are done for other reasons, such as routine testing. Symptoms eventually develop over the next 5 to 20 years. Those who do have symptoms at diagnosis typically have poorer outcomes.Common early symptoms include:Later signs and symptoms may include:It's not clear what causes primary biliary cholangitis. Many experts consider it an autoimmune disease in which the body turns against its own cells. Researchers believe this autoimmune response may be triggered by environmental and genetic factors.The liver inflammation seen in primary biliary cholangitis starts when certain types of white blood cells called T cells, also known as T lymphocytes, start to collect in the liver. Usually, these immune cells detect and help defend against germs, such as bacteria and viruses. But in primary biliary cholangitis, they mistakenly destroy the healthy cells that line the small bile ducts in the liver.Inflammation in the smallest ducts spreads and eventually damages other cells in the liver. As the cells die, they're replaced by scar tissue, also known as fibrosis, that can lead to cirrhosis. Cirrhosis is scarring of liver tissue that makes it difficult for your liver to work properly.The following factors may increase your risk of primary biliary cholangitis:Researchers think that genetic factors combined with certain environmental factors trigger primary biliary cholangitis. These environmental factors may include:As liver damage worsens, primary biliary cholangitis can cause serious health problems, including:Primary biliary cholangitis care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Transplants support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.1606 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 15 Replies Fri, Jun 21, 2024 100 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Sex.Age.Genetics.Geography.Infections,Smoking cigarettes,Exposure to toxic chemicals,Liver scarring, called cirrhosis.Increased pressure in the portal vein, called portal hypertension.Enlarged veins, called varices.Enlarged spleen, called splenomegaly.Gallstones and bile duct stones.Liver cancer.Weak bones, called osteoporosis.Vitamin deficiencies.High cholesterol.Decreased mental function, called hepatic encephalopathy.Increased risk of other disease.Advertising & Sponsorship