Primary immunodeficiency disorders — also called primary immune disorders or primary immunodeficiency — weaken the immune system, allowing infections and other health problems to occur more easily.Many people with primary immunodeficiency are born missing some of the body's immune defenses or with the immune system not working properly, which leaves them more susceptible to germs that can cause infections.So far, researchers have identified more than 300 forms of primary immunodeficiency disorders. Some forms are so mild they can go unnoticed until adulthood. Other types are severe enough that they're discovered soon after an affected baby is born.Treatments can boost the immune system in many types of primary immunodeficiency disorders. Research is ongoing, leading to improved treatments and enhanced quality of life for people with the condition.One of the most common signs of primary immunodeficiency is having infections that are more frequent, longer lasting or harder to treat than are the infections of someone with a typical immune system. You may also get infections that a person with a healthy immune system likely wouldn't get (opportunistic infections).Signs and symptoms differ depending on the type of primary immunodeficiency disorder, and they vary from person to person.Signs and symptoms of primary immunodeficiency can include:If you or your child has frequent, recurrent or severe infections or infections that don't respond to treatments, talk to your health care provider. Early diagnosis and treatment of primary immune deficiencies can prevent infections that can cause long-term problems.Many primary immunodeficiency disorders are inherited — passed down from one or both parents. Problems in the genetic code that acts as a blueprint for producing the cells of the body (DNA) cause many of these immune system defects.There are more than 300 types of primary immunodeficiency disorders, and researchers continue to identify more. They can be broadly classified into six groups based on the part of the immune system that's affected:The only known risk factor is having a family history of a primary immune deficiency disorder, which increases your risk of having the condition.If you have a type of primary immune deficiency disorder, you might want to seek genetic counseling if you plan to have a family.Complications caused by a primary immunodeficiency disorder vary depending on what type you have. They can include:Because primary immune disorders are caused by genetic changes, there's no way to prevent them. But when you or your child has a weakened immune system, you can take steps to prevent infections:Mar 12, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.