Deterioration of cells in the brainstem, cerebral cortex, cerebellum and basal ganglia — a cluster of cells deep within your brain — is what causes the coordination and movement issues of progressive supranuclear palsy.Progressive supranuclear palsy is a rare brain disease that affects walking, balance, eye movements and swallowing. The disease results from the damage of cells in areas of the brain that control body movement, coordination, thinking and other important functions. Progressive supranuclear palsy also is called Steele-Richardson-Olszewski syndrome.Progressive supranuclear palsy worsens over time and can lead to dangerous complications, such as pneumonia and trouble swallowing. There's no cure for progressive supranuclear palsy, so treatment focuses on managing the symptoms.Symptoms of progressive supranuclear palsy include:Additional symptoms of progressive supranuclear palsy vary and may mimic those of Parkinson's disease and dementia. Symptoms get worse over time and may include:Make an appointment with your healthcare professional if you experience any of the symptoms listed above.The cause of progressive supranuclear palsy isn't known. Its symptoms result from the damage of cells in areas of the brain, especially areas that help you control body movements and thinking.Researchers have found that the damaged brain cells of people with progressive supranuclear palsy have excess amounts of a protein called tau. Clumps of tau also are found in other brain diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease.Rarely, progressive supranuclear palsy occurs within a family. But a genetic link isn't clear. Most people with progressive supranuclear palsy haven't inherited the disorder.The only proven risk factor for progressive supranuclear palsy is age. The condition typically affects people in their late 60s and 70s. It's virtually unknown in people under the age of 40.Complications of progressive supranuclear palsy result primarily from slow and difficult muscle movements. These complications may include:To avoid the hazards of choking, your healthcare professional may recommend a feeding tube. To avoid injuries due to falling, a walker or a wheelchair may be used.Progressive supranuclear palsy care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.A loss of balance while walking.An inability to aim your eyes properly.Advertising & Sponsorship