Progeria (pro-JEER-e-uh), also known as Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome, is an extremely rare, progressive genetic disorder. It causes children to age rapidly, starting in their first two years of life.Children with progeria generally appear healthy at birth. During the first year, symptoms such as slowed growth, loss of fat tissue and hair loss begin to appear.Heart problems or strokes are the eventual cause of death in most children with progeria. The average life expectancy for a child with progeria is about 15 years. Some with the condition may die younger and others may live longer, even to about 20 years.There's no cure for progeria, but new treatments and research show some promise for managing symptoms and complications.Usually within the first year of life, you'll notice that your child's growth has slowed. But motor development and intelligence are not affected.Symptoms of this progressive disorder cause a distinctive appearance. They include:Symptoms also include health issues:Progeria is usually found in infancy or early childhood. This often happens at regular checkups, when a baby first shows the distinctive signs of premature aging.If you notice changes in your child that could be symptoms of progeria, or you have any concerns about your child's growth or development, make an appointment with your child's health care provider.A change in one gene causes progeria. This gene, known as lamin A (LMNA), makes a protein that's needed to hold the center of a cell, called the nucleus, together. When the LMNA gene has a change, a flawed lamin A protein called progerin is made. Progerin makes cells unstable and appears to lead to progeria's aging process.The changed gene that causes progeria is rarely passed down in families. In most cases, the rare gene change that causes progeria happens by chance.There are other syndromes that may include problems with progerin-like proteins. These conditions are called progeroid syndromes. The changed genes that cause these syndromes are passed down in families. They cause rapid aging and a shortened life span:There are no known factors, such as lifestyle or environmental issues, that increase the risk of having progeria or giving birth to a child with progeria. But the age of the father has been described as a possible risk factor. Progeria is extremely rare. If you've had one child with progeria, the chances of having a second child with progeria are slightly higher than the general population but are still low.If you have a child with progeria, a genetic counselor can give you information about the risk of having other children with progeria.Severe hardening of the arteries, known as atherosclerosis, is common in progeria. Arteries are blood vessels that carry nutrients and oxygen from the heart to the rest of the body. Atherosclerosis is a condition in which the walls of the arteries stiffen and thicken. This often limits blood flow. The condition especially affects arteries in the heart and brain.Most children with progeria die of complications related to atherosclerosis, including:Other health problems frequently linked with aging — such as an increased cancer risk — usually don't develop as part of progeria.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Wiedemann-Rautenstrauch syndrome,Werner syndrome,Advertising & Sponsorship