Prostatitis is a disorder of the prostate gland usually associated with inflammation. Prostatitis often causes painful or difficult urination, as well as pain in the groin, pelvic area or genitals. Bacterial infections cause some but not all cases of prostatitis.The prostate gland, about the size of a walnut, is located just below the bladder in men. It surrounds the top portion of the tube that drains urine from the bladder (urethra). The prostate and other sex glands produce the fluid that transports sperm during ejaculation (semen).There are generally four types of prostatitis:Signs and symptoms of prostatitis can vary depending on the type of disorder. They may include:Several conditions can contribute to the signs and symptoms associated with prostatitis. It's important to get an accurate diagnosis and treatment as soon as possible.Get immediate care if you have any of the following:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe prostate gland is located just below the bladder in men and surrounds the top portion of the tube that drains urine from the bladder (urethra). The prostate's primary function is to produce the fluid that nourishes and transports sperm (seminal fluid).Causes vary depending on the type of prostatitis.Risk factors for prostatitis include:Additional risk factors for chronic prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome may include:Complications of acute or chronic prostatitis can include:Complications of chronic prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome may include:There's no direct evidence that prostatitis can lead to prostate cancer. Researchers are investigating whether chronic inflammation of the prostate is a risk factor for cancer.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Acute bacterial prostatitis,Chronic bacterial prostatitis,Chronic prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome,Asymptomatic inflammatory prostatitis,Acute bacterial prostatitisChronic bacterial prostatitisChronic prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndromeAsymptomatic inflammatory prostatitis,Advertising & Sponsorship