Pseudomembranous (SOO-doe-mem-bruh-nus) colitis is inflammation of the colon associated with an overgrowth of the bacterium Clostridioides difficile (formerly Clostridium difficile) — often called C. diff. Pseudomembranous colitis is sometimes called antibiotic-associated colitis or C. difficile colitis.This overgrowth of Clostridioides difficile (C. difficile) is often related to a recent hospital stay or antibiotic treatment. C. difficile infections are more common in people over 65 years old. The colon is a long tubelike organ in the abdomen. It's the longest part of the large intestine. The colon carries waste to be expelled from the body. The rectum makes up the last several inches of the colon. Symptoms of pseudomembranous colitis may include:Symptoms of pseudomembranous colitis can begin as soon as 1 to 2 days after you start taking an antibiotic, or as long as several months or longer after you finish taking the antibiotic.If you are currently taking or have recently taken antibiotics and you develop diarrhea, contact your health care provider, even if the diarrhea is relatively mild. Also, see your provider anytime you have severe diarrhea, with a fever, painful stomach cramps, or blood or pus in your stool.Your body usually keeps the many bacteria in your colon in a naturally healthy balance. However, antibiotics and other medicines can upset this balance. Pseudomembranous colitis occurs when certain bacteria, usually C. difficile, rapidly outgrow other bacteria that typically keep them in check. Certain toxins produced by C. difficile can rise to levels high enough to damage the colon.While almost any antibiotic can cause pseudomembranous colitis, some antibiotics are more commonly linked to pseudomembranous colitis than others, including:Other medicines besides antibiotics can sometimes cause pseudomembranous colitis. Chemotherapy drugs that are used to treat cancer may disrupt the normal balance of bacteria in the colon.Certain diseases that affect the colon, such as ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease, also may put people at risk of pseudomembranous colitis.C. difficile spores are resistant to many common disinfectants and can be transmitted from the hands of health care professionals to patients. More and more often, C. difficile is being reported in people with no known risk factors, including people with no recent health care contact or use of antibiotics. This is called community-acquired C. difficile.An aggressive strain of C. difficile has emerged that produces far more toxins than other strains do. The new strain may be more resistant to certain medicines and has been reported in people who haven't been in the hospital or taken antibiotics.Factors that may increase your risk of pseudomembranous colitis include:Treatment of pseudomembranous colitis is usually successful. However, even with prompt diagnosis and treatment, pseudomembranous colitis can be life-threatening. Possible complications include:In addition, pseudomembranous colitis may sometimes return, days or even weeks after apparently successful treatment.To help prevent the spread of C. difficile, hospitals and other health care facilities follow strict infection-control guidelines. If you have a friend or family member in a hospital or nursing home, don't be afraid to remind caregivers to follow the recommended precautions.Preventive measures include:Dec 14, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.