In psoriasis, the life cycle of your skin cells greatly accelerates, leading to a buildup of dead cells on the surface of the epidermis.Psoriasis is a skin disease that causes a rash with itchy, scaly patches, most commonly on the knees, elbows, trunk and scalp.Psoriasis is a common, long-term (chronic) disease with no cure. It can be painful, interfere with sleep and make it hard to concentrate. The condition tends to go through cycles, flaring for a few weeks or months, then subsiding for a while. Common triggers in people with a genetic predisposition to psoriasis include infections, cuts or burns, and certain medications.Treatments are available to help you manage symptoms. And you can try lifestyle habits and coping strategies to help you live better with psoriasis.Plaque psoriasis is the most common type of psoriasis. It causes dry, raised skin patches (plaques) covered with scales.Guttate psoriasis, more common in children and young adults, appears as small, water-drop-shaped spots on the trunk, arms or legs. These spots are typically covered by a fine scale.Inverse psoriasis causes smooth patches of inflamed skin in the folds of the skin. It usually appears under the breasts and around the groin and buttocks.Psoriasis can affect fingernails and toenails, causing pitting, abnormal nail growth and discoloration.Pustular psoriasis generally develops quickly, with pus-filled blisters appearing just hours after the skin becomes inflamed and tender. It usually appears on the palms or the soles.The least common type of psoriasis, erythrodermic psoriasis can cover the entire body with a peeling, itchy rash.Common signs and symptoms of psoriasis include:There are several types of psoriasis, each of which varies in its signs and symptoms:If you suspect that you may have psoriasis, see your health care provider. Also seek medical care if your condition:Vivien Willliams: Your fingernails are clues to your overall health. Many people develop lines or ridges from the cuticle to the tip.Rachel Miest, M.D., Department of Dermatology, Mayo Clinic: Those are actually completely fine and just a part of normal aging.Ms. Williams: But Dr. Rachel Miest says there are other nail changes you should not ignore that may indicate …Dr. Miest: liver problems, kidney problems, nutritional deficiencies …Ms. Williams: And other issues. Here are six examples: No. 1 is pitting. This could be a sign of psoriasis. Two is clubbing. Clubbing happens when your oxygen is low and could be a sign of lung issues. Three is spooning. It can happen if you have iron-deficient anemia or liver disease. Four is called "a Beau's line." It's a horizontal line that indicates a previous injury or infection. Five is nail separation. This may happen as a result of injury, infection or a medication. And six is yellowing of the nails, which may be the result of chronic bronchitis.For the Mayo Clinic News Network, I'm Vivien Williams.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesPsoriasis is thought to be an immune system problem that causes skin cells to grow faster than usual. In the most common type of psoriasis, known as plaque psoriasis, this rapid turnover of cells results in dry, scaly patches.The cause of psoriasis isn't fully understood. It's thought to be an immune system problem where infection-fighting cells attack healthy skin cells by mistake. Researchers believe that both genetics and environmental factors play a role. The condition is not contagious.Many people who are predisposed to psoriasis may be free of symptoms for years until the disease is triggered by some environmental factor. Common psoriasis triggers include:Anyone can develop psoriasis. About a third of instances begin in childhood. These factors can increase the risk of developing the disease:If you have psoriasis, you're at greater risk of developing other conditions, including:Psoriasis care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Plaque psoriasis.Nail psoriasis.Guttate psoriasis.Inverse psoriasis.Pustular psoriasis.Erythrodermic psoriasis.Vivien Willliams:Rachel Miest, M.D., Department of Dermatology, Mayo Clinic:Ms. Williams:Dr. Miest:Ms. Williams:Family history.Smoking.Advertising & Sponsorship