Pulmonary atresia (uh-TREE-zhuh) with ventricular septal defect (VSD) is a heart problem present at birth. That means it’s a congenital heart defect.In this type of pulmonary atresia, the valve between the heart and lungs is not fully formed. This valve is called the pulmonary valve. Blood can't flow from the right lower heart chamber, called the right ventricle, to the lungs. In pulmonary atresia with ventricular septal defect (VSD), there also is a hole between the two pumping chambers of the heart.The VSD lets blood flow into and out of the right lower heart chamber. Some blood also may flow through a natural opening called the ductus arteriosus. The ductus arteriosus usually closes soon after birth. But medicines can keep it open.The lung artery and its branches can be very small or not exist in babies with pulmonary atresia. If these blood vessels are missing, other arteries form on the body's main artery, called the aorta. The arteries help provide blood flow to the lungs. They are called major aortopulmonary collateral arteries (MAPCAs).Pulmonary atresia with ventricular septal defect is a life-threatening condition. A baby with pulmonary atresia doesn't get enough oxygen. Medicines and one or more procedures or surgeries are needed to improve blood flow and fix the heart.Pulmonary atresia with ventricular septal defect (VSD) is most often diagnosed at birth or soon after. Tests that may be used to diagnose pulmonary atresia with VSD include:A baby with pulmonary atresia with ventricular septal defect (VSD) needs treatment right away. Treatment may include medicines and one or more surgeries or procedures.A baby with pulmonary atresia with VSD needs one or more surgeries or procedures to improve blood flow and to help the heart work better. Treatment depends on the structure of the pulmonary arteries and whether there are major aortopulmonary collateral arteries (MAPCAs).Surgeries or other procedures to treat pulmonary atresia with ventricular septal defect may include:Babies with pulmonary atresia with ventricular septal defect (VSD) need regular checkups by a doctor with training in heart conditions present at birth.Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart & Blood Health support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.346 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 58 Replies Thu, Jun 20, 2024 106 Replies Wed, Jun 19, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Pulse oximetry.Chest X-ray.Echocardiogram.Electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG).Cardiac catheterization.Heart CT scan, also called a cardiac CT scan.Catheter procedure for the pulmonary artery branches.Systemic-to-pulmonary artery shunt.Neonatal complete repair.One-stage complete repair.Staged unifocalization.Advertising & Sponsorship