Raynaud's (ray-NOSE) disease causes some areas of the body — such as fingers and toes — to feel numb and cold in response to cold temperatures or stress. In Raynaud's disease, smaller arteries that supply blood to the skin narrow. This limits blood flow to affected areas, which is called vasospasm.Other names for this condition are:Women are more likely than men to have Raynaud's disease. It seems to be more common in people who live in colder climates.Treatment of Raynaud's disease depends on its severity and whether you have other health conditions. For most people, Raynaud's disease isn't disabling, but it can affect your quality of life.Raynaud's disease causes smaller arteries that supply blood flow to the skin to narrow in response to cold or stress. The affected body parts, usually fingers and toes, might turn white then blue. Depending on your skin color, these color changes may be harder or easier to see. The affected areas may feel cold and numb until blood flow improves, usually after warming up.Symptoms of Raynaud's disease include:During an attack of Raynaud's, affected areas of the skin usually first turn pale. Next, they often change color and feel cold and numb. When the skin warms and blood flow improves, the affected areas may change color again, throb, tingle or swell.Raynaud's most commonly affects fingers and toes. But it also can affect other areas of the body, such as nose, lips, ears and even nipples. After warming up, the return of blood flow to the area can take 15 minutes.See your health care provider right away if you have a history of severe Raynaud's and get a sore or infection in one of your affected fingers or toes.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesExperts don't fully understand the cause of Raynaud's attacks. But blood vessels in the hands and feet appear to react too strongly to cold temperatures or stress.With Raynaud's, arteries to the fingers and toes narrow when exposed to cold or stress. The narrowed arteries limit blood flow. Over time, these small arteries can thicken slightly and limit blood flow even more.Cold temperatures are the most likely cause of an attack. Examples are putting hands in cold water, taking something from a freezer or being in cold air. For some people, emotional stress can trigger an episode.There are two main types of the condition.Secondary Raynaud's. Also called Raynaud's phenomenon, this form develops because of another health condition. Although secondary Raynaud's is less common than the primary form, it tends to be more serious.Symptoms of secondary Raynaud's usually appear around age 40. That's later than symptoms appear for primary Raynaud's.Causes of secondary Raynaud's include:Risk factors for primary Raynaud's include:Risk factors for secondary Raynaud's include: If secondary Raynaud's is severe, reduced blood flow to fingers or toes could cause tissue damage. But that's rare.A completely blocked artery can lead to skin sores or dead tissue. This can be difficult to treat. Rarely, very bad untreated instances might require removing the affected part of the body.To help prevent Raynaud's attacks:Bundle up outdoors. When it's cold, wear a hat, scarf, socks and boots, and two sets of mittens or gloves. Thermal underwear might help. A coat with cuffs that close around mittens or gloves helps protect the hands from cold air.Wear earmuffs and a face mask if the tip of your nose and your earlobes get too cold.Take care indoors. Wear socks. To take food out of the refrigerator or freezer, wear gloves, mittens or oven mitts. Some people find it helpful to wear mittens and socks to bed during winter.Because air conditioning can cause attacks, set your air conditioner to a warmer temperature. Use drinking glasses that keep hands from feeling cold.Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart & Blood Health support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.346 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 58 Replies Thu, Jun 20, 2024 106 Replies Wed, Jun 19, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Primary Raynaud's.Secondary Raynaud's.Connective tissue diseases.Diseases of the arteries.Carpal tunnel syndrome.Repeated actions or vibration.Smoking.Injuries to the hands or feet.Certain medicines.Sex.Age.Climate.Family history.Certain diseases.Certain jobs.Certain substances.Bundle up outdoors.Warm your car.Take care indoors.Advertising & Sponsorship