A rectovaginal fistula is a connection that should not exist between the lower part of the large intestine — the rectum or anus — and the vagina. Bowel contents can leak through the fistula, allowing gas or stool to pass through the vagina.A rectovaginal fistula may result from:The condition may cause gas and stool to leak out of the vagina. This may lead to emotional distress and physical discomfort for you, which may impact your self-esteem and intimacy.Talk with your health care provider if you have symptoms of a rectovaginal fistula, even if it's embarrassing. Some rectovaginal fistulas may close on their own, but most need surgery to fix them.The most common symptom of a rectovaginal fistula is passing gas or stool from the vagina. Depending on the fistula's size and location, you may have only minor symptoms. Or you may have significant problems with stool and gas leakage and keeping the area clean.See your health care provider if you have any symptoms of a rectovaginal fistula.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Get the latest information from our Mayo Clinic experts on women’s health topics, serious and complex conditions, wellness and more. Click to view a preview and subscribe below.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesA rectovaginal fistula may form as a result of:A rectovaginal fistula has no clear risk factors.Complications of a rectovaginal fistula may include:Among people with Crohn's disease who develop a fistula, the chances of complications are high. These can include poor healing, or another fistula forming later.There are no steps you need to take to prevent a rectovaginal fistula.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Injuries during childbirth.Inflammatory bowel disease.Cancer or radiation treatment in the pelvic area.Surgery involving the vagina, perineum, rectum or anus.Complication from diverticulitis.Other causes.Advertising & Sponsorship