The rectum is the last several inches of the large intestine. Rectal cancer starts as a growth of cells in the rectum.Rectal cancer is a kind of cancer that starts as a growth of cells in the rectum. The rectum is the last several inches of the large intestine. It starts at the end of the final segment of the colon and ends when it reaches the short, narrow passage known as the anus.Cancer inside the rectum and cancer inside the colon are often referred to together as colorectal cancer.While rectal and colon cancers are similar in many ways, their treatments are quite different. This is mainly because the rectum is barely separated from other organs and structures. It sits in a tight space that can make surgery to remove rectal cancer complex.Rectal cancer treatment usually involves surgery to remove the cancer. Other treatments may include chemotherapy, radiation or a combination of the two. Targeted therapy and immunotherapy also may be used.Rectal cancer may not cause symptoms early on. Symptoms of rectal cancer usually happen when the disease is advanced.Signs and symptoms of rectal cancer include:Make an appointment with your doctor or other healthcare professional if you have any symptoms that worry you.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and receive the latest on colon cancer treatment, care and management.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You will receive the first colon cancer care journey message in your inbox shortly, which will include the latest treatment options, innovations and other information from our colon cancer experts.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe exact cause of most rectal cancers isn't known.Rectal cancer happens when cells in the rectum develop changes in their DNA. A cell's DNA holds the instructions that tell a cell what to do. In healthy cells, the DNA gives instructions to grow and multiply at a set rate. The instructions tell the cells to die at a set time. In cancer cells, the DNA changes give different instructions. The changes tell the cancer cells to make many more cells quickly. Cancer cells can keep living when healthy cells would die. This causes too many cells.The cancer cells might form a mass called a tumor. The tumor can grow to invade and destroy healthy body tissue. In time, cancer cells can break away and spread to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads, it's called metastatic cancer.Factors that may increase the risk of rectal cancer are the same as those that increase the risk of colon cancer. Colorectal cancer risk factors include:Rectal cancer can lead to complications, including:There's no sure way to prevent rectal cancer, but you can reduce your risk if you:Colorectal cancer screening reduces the risk of cancer by finding precancerous polyps in the colon and rectum that could turn into cancer. Ask your healthcare professional about when you should begin screening. Most medical organizations recommend starting screening around age 45. You may be screened earlier if you have risk factors for colorectal cancer.Several screening options exist. Talk about your options with your healthcare professional. Together you can decide which tests are right for you.If you choose to drink alcohol, do so in moderation. For healthy adults, that means up to one drink a day for women and up to two drinks a day for men.Choose a healthy diet with a variety of fruits and vegetables. Food sources of vitamins and nutrients are best. Avoid taking large doses of vitamins in pill form, as they may be harmful.Aim for at least 30 minutes of exercise on most days of the week. If you haven't been active lately, ask your healthcare professional whether it's OK and start slowly.If your weight is healthy, work to maintain that weight. If you need to lose weight, ask a healthcare professional about healthy ways to lower your weight. Eat fewer calories and slowly increase the amount of exercise.Talk with your healthcare team about strategies and aids that can help you quit. Options include nicotine replacement products, medicines and support groups. If you've never smoked, don't start.Rectal cancer care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Colorectal Cancer support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.57 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 87 Replies Mon, Jun 17, 2024 35 Replies Wed, Jun 12, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.A personal history of colorectal cancer or polyps.Black race.Diabetes.Drinking alcohol.A diet low in vegetables.Family history of colorectal cancer.Inflammatory bowel disease.Inherited syndromes that increase colorectal cancer risk.Obesity.Older age.Radiation therapy for previous cancer.Smoking.Too little exercise.Bleeding in the rectum.Intestinal obstruction.Intestinal perforation.Advertising & Sponsorship