Recurrent breast cancer is breast cancer that comes back after initial treatment. Although the initial treatment is aimed at eliminating all cancer cells, a few may have evaded treatment and survived. These undetected cancer cells multiply, becoming recurrent breast cancer.Recurrent breast cancer may occur months or years after your initial treatment. The cancer may come back in the same place as the original cancer (local recurrence), or it may spread to other areas of your body (distant recurrence).Learning you have recurrent breast cancer may be harder than dealing with the initial diagnosis. But having recurrent breast cancer is far from hopeless. Treatment may eliminate local, regional or distant recurrent breast cancer. Even if a cure isn't possible, treatment may control the disease for long periods of time.Signs and symptoms of recurrent breast cancer vary depending on where the cancer comes back.In a local recurrence, cancer reappears in the same area as your original cancer.If you've undergone a lumpectomy, the cancer could recur in the remaining breast tissue. If you've undergone a mastectomy, the cancer could recur in the tissue that lines the chest wall or in the skin.Signs and symptoms of local recurrence within the same breast may include:Signs and symptoms of local recurrence on the chest wall after a mastectomy may include:A regional breast cancer recurrence means the cancer has come back in the nearby lymph nodes.Signs and symptoms of regional recurrence may include a lump or swelling in the lymph nodes located:A distant (metastatic) recurrence means the cancer has traveled to distant parts of the body, most commonly the bones, liver and lungs.Signs and symptoms include:After your breast cancer treatment ends, your doctor will likely create a schedule of follow-up exams for you. During follow-up exams, your doctor checks for any symptoms or signs of cancer recurrence.You can also report any new signs or symptoms to your doctor. Make an appointment with your doctor if you notice any persistent signs and symptoms that worry you.Recurrent breast cancer occurs when cells that were part of your original breast cancer break away from the original tumor and hide nearby in the breast or in another part of your body. Later, these cells begin growing again.The chemotherapy, radiation, hormone therapy or other treatment you may have received after your first breast cancer diagnosis was intended to kill any cancer cells that may have remained after surgery. But sometimes these treatments aren't able to kill all of the cancer cells.Sometimes cancer cells may be dormant for years without causing harm. Then something happens that activates the cells, so they grow and spread to other parts of the body. It's not clear why this occurs.For breast cancer survivors, factors that increase the risk of a recurrence include:Positive or close tumor margins. During breast cancer surgery, the surgeon tries to remove the cancer along with a small amount of the normal tissue that surrounds it. A pathologist examines the edges of the tissue to look for cancer cells.If the borders are free of cancer when examined under a microscope, that's considered a negative margin. If any part of the border has cancer cells (positive margin), or the margin between the tumor and normal tissue is close, the risk of breast cancer recurrence is increased.Strategies that have been linked to a reduced risk of breast cancer recurrence include:Recurrent breast cancer care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Breast Cancer support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.190 Replies Tue, Jun 25, 2024 83 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 14 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Lymph node involvement.Larger tumor size.Positive or close tumor margins.Lack of radiation treatment following a lumpectomy.Younger age.Inflammatory breast cancer.Lack of endocrine therapy for hormone receptor-positive breast cancer.Cancer cells with certain characteristics.Obesity.Hormone therapy.Chemotherapy.Radiation therapy.Targeted therapy.Bone-building drugs.Maintaining a healthy weight.Exercising.Choosing a healthy diet.Advertising & Sponsorship