Reye's syndrome, also known as Reye syndrome, is a rare but serious condition that causes swelling in the liver and brain. Reye's syndrome can occur at any age but usually affects children and teenagers after a viral infection, most commonly the flu or chickenpox.Symptoms such as confusion, seizures and loss of consciousness need emergency treatment. Early diagnosis and treatment of Reye's syndrome can save a child's life.Aspirin has been linked with Reye's syndrome, so use caution when giving aspirin to children or teenagers for fever or pain. Though aspirin is approved for use in children older than age 3, children and teenagers recovering from chickenpox or flu-like symptoms should never take aspirin.For the treatment of fever or pain, consider giving your child infants' or children's acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) or ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin, others). They're safer alternatives to aspirin. Talk to your health care provider if you have concerns.In Reye's syndrome, a child's blood sugar usually drops while levels of ammonia and acidity in the blood rises. The liver also may swell, and fats may build up. Swelling may occur in the brain. This can cause seizures, convulsions or loss of consciousness.The symptoms of Reye's syndrome usually start about 3 to 5 days after the onset of a viral infection. This may be the flu, known as influenza, or chickenpox. Or Reye's syndrome may develop after an upper respiratory infection such as a cold.For children younger than age 2, the first symptoms of Reye's syndrome may include:For older children and teenagers, early symptoms may include:As the condition progresses, symptoms may become more serious, including:These symptoms need emergency treatment.Early diagnosis and treatment of Reye's syndrome can save a child's life. If you suspect that your child has Reye's syndrome, it's important to act quickly.Seek emergency medical help if your child:Contact your child's health care provider if your child experiences the following after a bout with the flu or chickenpox:The use of aspirin during a viral illness has most commonly been linked to Reye's syndrome. But the exact cause of Reye's syndrome is unknown. Several factors may play a role.In some cases, the symptoms of Reye's syndrome may be caused by another health condition such as an underlying metabolic disorder. This can occur even without the use of aspirin.The most frequent of these rare disorders is medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency. MCAD deficiency is a fatty acid oxidation disorder. Fatty acid oxidation disorders are a group of inherited metabolic disorders in which the body is unable to break down fatty acids. This happens because an enzyme is missing or not working properly. In people with a fatty acid oxidation disorder, aspirin use during a viral illness is more likely to trigger symptoms of Reye's syndrome. A screening test can determine if your child has a fatty acid oxidation disorder.Reye's syndrome may develop after influenza or chickenpox in particular.Exposure to certain toxins — such as insecticides, herbicides and paint thinner — may produce symptoms similar to Reye's syndrome. But these toxins don't cause Reye's syndrome.The following factors — usually when they occur together — may increase your child's risk of developing Reye's syndrome:Most children and teenagers who have Reye's syndrome survive. However, varying degrees of lasting brain damage are possible. Without proper diagnosis and treatment, Reye's syndrome can cause death within a few days.Use caution when giving aspirin to children or teenagers. Though aspirin is approved for use in children older than age 3, children and teenagers recovering from chickenpox or flu-like symptoms should never take aspirin. This includes plain aspirin and medicines that contain aspirin.Some hospitals and medical facilities screen newborns for fatty acid oxidation disorders to determine which children are at greater risk of developing Reye's syndrome. Children with known fatty acid oxidation disorders should not take aspirin or aspirin-containing products.Always check the label before you give your child medicine. This includes products you buy without a prescription and alternative or herbal remedies. Aspirin can show up in some unexpected products such as Alka-Seltzer.Sometimes aspirin goes by other names, such as:For the treatment of fever or pain related to the flu, chickenpox or another viral illness, consider giving your child a safer alternative to aspirin. This may include infants' or children's acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) or ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin, others).There's an exception to the general rule about aspirin. Children and teenagers who have certain chronic diseases, such as Kawasaki disease, may need long-term treatment with medicines that contain aspirin.If your child needs to take aspirin, make sure your child's vaccines are current. This includes two doses of the chickenpox vaccine and a yearly flu vaccine. Avoiding these two viral illnesses can help prevent Reye's syndrome.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.For children younger than age 2,For older children and teenagers,Seek emergency medical helpContact your child's health care providerAdvertising & Sponsorship