Rhabdomyosarcoma is a rare type of cancer that starts as a growth of cells in soft tissue. Soft tissues support and connect organs and other parts of the body. Rhabdomyosarcoma most often starts in muscle tissue.Although rhabdomyosarcoma can start anywhere in the body, it's more likely to start in the:Rhabdomyosarcoma treatment often involves surgery, chemotherapy and radiation therapy. Treatment depends on where the cancer starts, how large it grows and whether it spreads to other parts of the body.Research into diagnosis and treatment have greatly improved the outlook for people diagnosed with rhabdomyosarcoma. More and more people are living for years after a rhabdomyosarcoma diagnosis.Signs and symptoms of rhabdomyosarcoma depend on where the cancer starts.For example, if the cancer is in the head or neck area, symptoms may include:If the cancer is in the urinary or reproductive system, symptoms may include:If the cancer is in the arms or legs, symptoms may include:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Subscribe for free and receive an in-depth guide to coping with cancer, plus helpful information on how to get a second opinion. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview.ErrorSelect a topicErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.Your in-depth coping with cancer guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest about cancer news, research, and care.If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.Please, try again in a couple of minutesIt's not clear what causes rhabdomyosarcoma. It starts when a soft tissue cell develops changes in its DNA. A cell's DNA holds the instructions that tell a cell what to do.In healthy cells, the DNA gives instructions to grow and multiply at a set rate. The instructions tell the cells to die at a set time. In cancer cells, the DNA changes give different instructions. The changes tell the cancer cells to make many more cells quickly. Cancer cells can keep living when healthy cells would die. This causes too many cells.The cancer cells might form a mass called a tumor. The tumor can grow to invade and destroy healthy body tissue. In time, cancer cells can break away and spread to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads, it's called metastatic cancer.Factors that may increase the risk of rhabdomyosarcoma include:There is no way to prevent rhabdomyosarcoma.Complications of rhabdomyosarcoma and its treatment include:Rhabdomyosarcoma care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Sarcoma support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.803 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 57 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 59 Replies Fri, Jun 21, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Younger age.Inherited syndromes.Cancer that spreads.Long-term side effects.Advertising & Sponsorship