Rheumatoid arthritis can cause pain, swelling and deformity. As the tissue that lines your joints (synovial membrane) becomes inflamed and thickened, fluid builds up and joints erode and degrade.Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic inflammatory disorder that can affect more than just your joints. In some people, the condition can damage a wide variety of body systems, including the skin, eyes, lungs, heart and blood vessels.An autoimmune disorder, rheumatoid arthritis occurs when your immune system mistakenly attacks your own body's tissues.Unlike the wear-and-tear damage of osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis affects the lining of your joints, causing a painful swelling that can eventually result in bone erosion and joint deformity.The inflammation associated with rheumatoid arthritis is what can damage other parts of the body as well. While new types of medications have improved treatment options dramatically, severe rheumatoid arthritis can still cause physical disabilities.Signs and symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis may include:Early rheumatoid arthritis tends to affect your smaller joints first — particularly the joints that attach your fingers to your hands and your toes to your feet.As the disease progresses, symptoms often spread to the wrists, knees, ankles, elbows, hips and shoulders. In most cases, symptoms occur in the same joints on both sides of your body.About 40% of people who have rheumatoid arthritis also experience signs and symptoms that don't involve the joints. Areas that may be affected include:Rheumatoid arthritis signs and symptoms may vary in severity and may even come and go. Periods of increased disease activity, called flares, alternate with periods of relative remission — when the swelling and pain fade or disappear. Over time, rheumatoid arthritis can cause joints to deform and shift out of place.Make an appointment with your doctor if you have persistent discomfort and swelling in your joints.Vivien Williams: Pain, swelling and stiffness in your joints — all are symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis. But because these symptoms come and go, the condition can sometimes be tricky to diagnose. And it's important to get the right diagnosis because starting treatment early can make a difference.Virginia Wimmer, has rheumatoid arthritis: Give me your best shot!Ms. Williams: At first, Virginia Wimmer blamed her painful joints on too much volleyball.Ms. Wimmer: In my knees and in my wrists.Ms. Williams: For a couple years, she put up with the pain and swelling that would come and go. Then things got much worse.Ms. Wimmer: I couldn't have a ball touch my arms.Ms. Williams: She couldn't do much of anything, let alone play outside with her daughter.Ms. Wimmer: That was really hard. She'd have to beg me to play with her, and teach her, and help her. And I just had to sit and watch.Ms. Williams: Virginia was diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis.Nisha Manek, M.D., Rheumatology, Mayo Clinic: Rheumatoid arthritis is an inflammatory condition. It's also associated with the immune system.Ms. Williams: Dr. Nisha Manek says it happens when the immune system becomes deregulated. You see, the joint capsule has a lining of tissue called the synovium. The synovium makes fluid that keeps joints lubricated. When you have rheumatoid arthritis, your immune system sends antibodies to the synovium and causes inflammation. This causes pain and joint damage, especially in small joints in the fingers and wrists. But it can affect any joint.The good news is that treatment for rheumatoid arthritis has improved dramatically over the last years. Medications, such as methotrexate, help bring the immune system back into balance and steroids can help calm flare-ups. So what was once an often crippling disease can now be controlled for many people — people like Virginia whose disease is pretty severe.Ms. Wimmer: You can get to the point where you are doing the things that you love and that is the goal.Ms. Williams: Dr. Manek says if you have pain, swelling and stiffness in your joints that comes and goes and is on both sides of your body, see your doctor to see if it is rheumatoid arthritis.Rheumatoid is different than osteoarthritis which damages joints because of wear and tear.For Medical Edge, I'm Vivien Williams.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesRheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune disease. Normally, your immune system helps protect your body from infection and disease. In rheumatoid arthritis, your immune system attacks healthy tissue in your joints. It can also cause medical problems with your heart, lungs, nerves, eyes and skin.Doctors don't know what starts this process, although a genetic component appears likely. While your genes don't actually cause rheumatoid arthritis, they can make you more likely to react to environmental factors — such as infection with certain viruses and bacteria — that may trigger the disease.Factors that may increase your risk of rheumatoid arthritis include:Rheumatoid arthritis increases your risk of developing:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Vivien Williams:Virginia Wimmer, has rheumatoid arthritis:Ms. Williams:Ms. Wimmer:Ms. Williams:Ms. Wimmer:Ms. Williams:Ms. Wimmer:Ms. Williams:Nisha Manek, M.D., Rheumatology, Mayo Clinic:Ms. Williams:Ms. Wimmer:Ms. Williams:Your sex.Age.Family history.Smoking.Excess weight.Osteoporosis.Rheumatoid nodules.Dry eyes and mouth.Infections.Abnormal body composition.Carpal tunnel syndrome.Heart problems.Lung disease.Lymphoma.Advertising & Sponsorship