Rheumatic fever is an inflammatory disease that can develop when strep throat or scarlet fever isn't properly treated. Strep throat and scarlet fever are caused by an infection with streptococcus (strep-toe-KOK-us) bacteria.Rheumatic fever most often affects children ages 5 to 15. But younger children and adults can get it too. Rheumatic fever is rare in the United States and other developed countries.Rheumatic fever can cause long-lasting heart damage, including heart valve problems and heart failure. Treatment includes medicines to kill the strep bacteria. Other medicines are used to treat pain and prevent complications.Rheumatic fever symptoms usually start about 2 to 4 weeks after a strep throat infection. Symptoms are due to swelling, called inflammation, in the heart, joints, skin or central nervous system. There may be few symptoms or several. Symptoms can come and go or change while a person is sick with rheumatic fever.Rheumatic fever symptoms can include:Some people with rheumatic fever develop a condition called Sydenham chorea. Symptoms of this condition include:Properly treating strep throat can prevent rheumatic fever. Make an appointment with a healthcare professional if any of these symptoms of strep throat occur:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesRheumatic fever can happen after a throat infection from group A streptococcus bacteria, also called strep bacteria. The bacteria cause strep throat and scarlet fever. Improperly treated strep throat or scarlet fever infections cause rheumatic fever.There's little chance of getting rheumatic fever when strep throat is treated right away with antibiotics. It's important to finish all of the medicine.Group A strep infections of the skin or other parts of the body rarely cause rheumatic fever.How a strep infection causes rheumatic fever isn't clear. It may be that the bacteria trick the body's immune system into attacking healthy tissue. This usually happens in the heart, joints, skin and central nervous system. The incorrect immune system reaction causes swelling of joints and tissues. This swelling is called inflammation.Things that may increase the risk of rheumatic fever include:Joint and tissue swelling caused by rheumatic fever can last a few weeks to several months. For some people, the swelling causes long-term complications.One complication of rheumatic fever is long-lasting heart damage. This is called rheumatic heart disease. Rheumatic heart disease usually occurs years to decades after the original illness.However, severe rheumatic fever can start to damage the heart valves while a child still has symptoms of the infection. The valve between the two left chambers of the heart is most commonly affected. This valve is called the mitral valve. But other heart valves also may be affected.Rheumatic fever can cause these types of heart damage:The best way to prevent rheumatic fever is to treat strep throat infections or scarlet fever right away. It's also important to finish all of the prescribed antibiotics as directed.Rheumatic fever care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Genes.Specific type of strep bacteria.Environmental factors.Narrowing of a heart valve, also called valve stenosis.Backward flow of blood across a heart valve.Damage to heart muscle.Heart failure.Irregular heartbeats.Advertising & Sponsorship