Ringworm of the body (tinea corporis) is a rash caused by a fungal infection. It's usually an itchy, circular rash with clearer skin in the middle. Ringworm gets its name because of its appearance. No worm is involved. Ringworm often causes a ring-shaped rash that is itchy, scaly and slightly raised. The rings usually start small and then expand outward. Ringworm of the body is related to athlete's foot (tinea pedis), jock itch (tinea cruris) and ringworm of the scalp (tinea capitis). Ringworm often spreads by direct skin-to-skin contact with an infected person or animal.Mild ringworm often responds to antifungal medications applied to the skin. For more-severe infections, you may need to take antifungal pills for several weeks.Signs and symptoms of ringworm may include:Talk to your doctor if you have a rash that doesn't begin to improve within two weeks of using an over-the-counter antifungal product. You may need prescription medication.Ringworm is a contagious fungal infection caused by common mold-like parasites that live on the cells in the outer layer of your skin. It can be spread in the following ways:You're at higher risk of ringworm of the body if you:A fungal infection rarely spreads below the surface of the skin to cause serious illness. But people with weak immune systems, such as those with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), may find it difficult to get rid of the infection.Ringworm is difficult to prevent. The fungus that causes it is common, and the condition is contagious even before symptoms appear. Take these steps to reduce your risk of ringworm:Apr 26, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.