Rotavirus is a very contagious virus that causes diarrhea. Before the development of a vaccine, most children had been infected with the virus at least once by age 5.Although rotavirus infections are unpleasant, you can usually treat this infection at home with extra fluids to prevent dehydration. Occasionally, severe dehydration requires receiving fluids through a vein (intravenously) in the hospital.Good hygiene, such as washing your hands regularly, is important. But vaccination is the best way to prevent rotavirus infection.A rotavirus infection usually starts within two days of exposure to the virus. Early symptoms are a fever and vomiting, followed by three to seven days of watery diarrhea. The infection can cause abdominal pain as well.In healthy adults, a rotavirus infection may cause only mild signs and symptoms or none at all.Call your child's doctor if your child:If you're an adult, call your doctor if you:Rotavirus is present in an infected person's stool two days before symptoms appear and for up to 10 days after symptoms lessen. The virus spreads easily through hand-to-mouth contact throughout this time — even if the infected person doesn't have symptoms.If you have rotavirus and you don't wash your hands after using the toilet — or your child has rotavirus and you don't wash your hands after changing your child's diaper or helping your child use the toilet — the virus can spread to anything you touch, including food, toys and utensils. If another person touches your unwashed hands or a contaminated object and then touches his or her mouth, an infection may follow. The virus can remain infectious on surfaces that haven't been disinfected for weeks or months.It's possible to be infected with rotavirus more than once, even if you've been vaccinated. However, repeat infections are typically less severe.Rotavirus infections are common in children ages 3 to 35 months — particularly those who spend time in child care settings. Older adults and adults caring for young children have an increased risk of infection as well.In the United States, the risk of rotavirus is highest in winter and spring.Severe diarrhea can lead to dehydration, particularly in young children. Left untreated, dehydration can become a life-threatening condition regardless of its cause.To reduce the spread of rotavirus, wash your hands thoroughly and often — especially after you use the toilet, change your child's diaper or help your child use the toilet. But even strict hand-washing doesn't offer any guarantees. And commonly used alcohol-based hand sanitizers have little effect on rotavirus.The World Health Organization recommends that all countries give infants a rotavirus vaccine. There are two vaccines available:The vaccines are considered safe and effective, and studies show that they prevent thousands of children from developing rotavirus every year. However, rarely, they can cause a part of the intestine to fold back on itself (intussusception), resulting in possibly life-threatening intestinal blockage.Children who have had intussusception are more likely to have it again after receiving the rotavirus vaccine. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration recommends that the vaccine not be given to children who have a history of intussusception.For children who don't have a history of intussusception, there is a very small risk that it can develop after the rotavirus vaccine is given. Even so, the benefits of the vaccine far outweigh the risks.If your child has stomach pain, vomiting, diarrhea, blood in his or her stool, or a change in bowel movements after getting the rotavirus vaccine, contact your doctor immediately.Apr 28, 2021CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.