A ruptured eardrum (tympanic membrane perforation) is a hole or tear in the thin tissue that separates the ear canal from the middle ear (eardrum).A ruptured eardrum can result in hearing loss. It can also make the middle ear vulnerable to infections.A ruptured eardrum usually heals within a few weeks without treatment. But sometimes it requires a patch or surgical repair to heal. A ruptured (perforated) eardrum prevents the proper transmission of sound waves to the middle ear and leaves the middle ear vulnerable to infectious agents, water and other foreign substances. Signs and symptoms of a ruptured eardrum may include:Call your health care provider if you have signs or symptoms of a ruptured eardrum. The middle and inner ears are made up of delicate structures that are sensitive to injury or disease. It is important to try to figure out the cause of ear symptoms and determine whether a ruptured eardrum has occurred.Causes of a ruptured (perforated) eardrum may include:Barotrauma. Barotrauma is stress exerted on the eardrum when the air pressure in the middle ear and the air pressure in the environment are out of balance. If the pressure is severe, the eardrum can rupture. Barotrauma is most often caused by air pressure changes associated with air travel.Other events that can cause sudden changes in pressure — and possibly a ruptured eardrum — include scuba diving and a direct blow to the ear, such as the impact of an automobile air bag. The middle ear has three small bones — the hammer, or malleus; the anvil, or incus; and the stirrup, or stapes. The eardrum keeps the bones away from the outer ear. A narrow path called the eustachian tube joins the middle ear to the back of the nose and upper part of the throat. The cochlea, a snail-shaped structure, is part of your inner ear. The eardrum (tympanic membrane) has two primary roles:If the eardrum ruptures, uncommon problems can occur, especially if it fails to self-heal after three to six months. Possible complications include:Middle ear cyst (cholesteatoma). Although very rare, this cyst, which is composed of skin cells and other debris, can develop in the middle ear as a long-term result of eardrum rupture.Ear canal debris normally travels to the outer ear with the help of ear-protecting earwax. If the eardrum is ruptured, the skin debris can pass into the middle ear and form a cyst.A cyst in the middle ear provides a friendly environment for bacteria and contains proteins that can damage the bones of the middle ear.Follow these tips to avoid a ruptured (perforated) eardrum:Protect your ears during flight. If possible, don't fly if you have a cold or an active allergy that causes nasal or ear congestion. During takeoffs and landings, keep ears clear with pressure-equalizing earplugs, yawning or chewing gum.Or use the Valsalva maneuver — gently pushing air into the nose, as if blowing your nose, while pinching the nostrils and keeping the mouth closed. Don't sleep during ascents and descents.Jan 18, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.