The spleen is located just under your rib cage on your left side. A ruptured spleen may release a large amount of blood into the stomach cavity.A ruptured spleen is a medical emergency that occurs as a result of a break in your spleen's surface. Your spleen, situated just under your rib cage on your left side, helps your body fight infection and filter old blood cells from your bloodstream.A forceful blow to your stomach — during a sporting accident, a fistfight or a car crash, for example — is the usual cause of a ruptured spleen. If you have an enlarged spleen, a less forceful trauma might cause rupture. Without emergency treatment, the internal bleeding caused by a ruptured spleen can be life-threatening.Some people with ruptured spleens need emergency surgery. Others can be treated with several days of hospital care.Signs and symptoms of a ruptured spleen include:A ruptured spleen is a medical emergency. Seek emergency care after an injury if your signs and symptoms indicate that you may have a ruptured spleen.A spleen can rupture due to:If the spleen is already enlarged due to infection or another cause, there is increased risk that the spleen might rupture. Contact sports that involve blows to the chest also increase the risk of a ruptured spleen.A ruptured spleen can cause life-threatening bleeding into your stomach cavity.If you've been diagnosed with an enlarged spleen, ask your health care provider whether you need to avoid activities for several weeks that could cause it to rupture. These might include contact sports, heavy lifting and other activities that increase the risk of stomach trauma.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Injury to the left side of the body.An enlarged spleen.Advertising & Sponsorship