The sacroiliac joints link the pelvis and lower spine. These two joints are made up of the bony structure above the tailbone, known as the sacrum, and the top part of the pelvis, known as the ilium. The sacroiliac joints support the weight of the upper body when standing.Sacroiliitis (say-kroe-il-e-I-tis) is a painful condition that affects one or both sacroiliac joints. These joints sit where the lower spine and pelvis meet. Sacroiliitis can cause pain and stiffness in the buttocks or lower back, and the pain might go down one or both legs. Standing or sitting for a long time or climbing stairs can make the pain worse.Sacroiliitis can be hard to diagnose. It can be mistaken for other causes of low back pain. It's been linked to a group of diseases that cause inflammatory arthritis of the spine. Treatment might involve physical therapy and medicines.The pain of sacroiliitis most often occurs in the buttocks and lower back. It also can affect the legs, groin and even the feet. The pain can improve with movement. The following can make sacroiliitis pain worse:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesCauses for sacroiliac joint issues include:Certain conditions may increase the risk of swelling in the sacroiliac joints.Inflammatory forms of arthritis, such as ankylosing spondylitis and psoriatic arthritis, may increase the risk of sacroiliitis. Inflammatory bowel diseases, including Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis, also may increase the risk.Changes that happen to the body during pregnancy and childbirth also can stress the sacroiliac joints and cause pain and swelling.Sacroiliitis can cause difficulty with certain actions, such as bending, lifting, staying in one position and rising from being seated. The ongoing pain of sacroiliitis can lead to depression and loss of sleep.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Injury.Arthritis.Pregnancy.Infection.Advertising & Sponsorship