There are three pairs of major salivary glands. These glands are the parotid, sublingual and submandibular glands. Each gland has its own tube, called a duct, leading from the gland to the mouth.Salivary gland tumors are growths of cells that start in the salivary glands. Salivary gland tumors are rare.The salivary glands make saliva. Saliva aids in digestion, keeps the mouth moist and supports healthy teeth. There are three pairs of major salivary glands under and behind the jaw. These are the parotid, sublingual and submandibular glands. Many other tiny salivary glands are in the lips, inside the cheeks, and throughout the mouth and throat.Salivary gland tumors can happen in any salivary gland. Most salivary gland tumors occur in the parotid gland. Of these, most aren't cancer. For every five parotid gland tumors, on average, only one is found to be cancerous.Treatment for salivary gland tumors is usually with surgery to remove the tumor. People with salivary gland cancers may need additional treatments.Signs and symptoms of a salivary gland tumor may include:Make an appointment with your doctor or other healthcare professional if you have any symptoms that worry you.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Subscribe for free and receive an in-depth guide to coping with cancer, plus helpful information on how to get a second opinion. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview.ErrorSelect a topicErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.Your in-depth coping with cancer guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest about cancer news, research, and care.If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe cause of many salivary gland tumors isn't known. Healthcare professionals have identified some things that raise the risk of salivary gland tumors. These include smoking and radiation therapy for cancer. Not everyone with a salivary gland tumor has these risk factors, though. More research is needed to find out exactly what causes these tumors.Salivary gland tumors happen when cells in a salivary gland develop changes in their DNA. A cell's DNA holds the instructions that tell the cell what to do. In healthy cells, the DNA gives instructions to grow and multiply at a set rate. The instructions also tell the cells to die at a set time. In tumor cells, the changes give different instructions. The changes tell the tumor cells to make many more cells quickly. Tumor cells can keep living when healthy cells would die. This causes too many cells.Sometimes the changes in the DNA turn the cells into cancer cells. Cancer cells can invade and destroy healthy body tissue. In time, cancer cells can break away and spread to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads, it's called metastatic cancer.Many different types of salivary gland tumors exist. Salivary gland tumors are classified based on the type of cells involved in the tumors. Knowing the type of salivary gland tumor you have helps your healthcare team decide which treatment options are best for you.Types of salivary gland tumors that aren't cancerous include:Types of cancerous salivary gland tumors include:Factors that may increase the risk of salivary gland tumors include:Salivary gland tumors care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Older age.Radiation exposure.Smoking tobacco.Viral infections.Workplace exposure to certain substances.Advertising & Sponsorship