Salmonella infection (salmonellosis) is a common bacterial disease that affects the intestinal tract. Salmonella bacteria typically live in animal and human intestines and are shed through stool (feces). Humans become infected most frequently through contaminated water or food.Some people with salmonella infection have no symptoms. Most people develop diarrhea, fever and stomach (abdominal) cramps within 8 to 72 hours after exposure. Most healthy people recover within a few days to a week without specific treatment.In some cases, diarrhea can cause severe dehydration and requires prompt medical attention. Life-threatening complications also may develop if the infection spreads beyond the intestines. The risk of getting salmonella infection is higher with travel to countries without clean drinking water and proper sewage disposal.Salmonella infection is usually caused by eating raw or undercooked meat, poultry, and eggs or egg products or by drinking unpasteurized milk. The incubation period — the time between exposure and illness — can be 6 hours to 6 days. Often, people who have salmonella infection think they have the stomach flu.Possible signs and symptoms of salmonella infection include:Signs and symptoms of salmonella infection generally last a few days to a week. Diarrhea may last up to 10 days, but it may take several months before bowels return to usual stool habits.A few varieties of salmonella bacteria result in typhoid fever, a sometimes deadly disease that is more common in developing countries.Most people don't need to seek medical attention for salmonella infection because it clears up on its own within a few days.However, if the affected person is an infant, young child, older adult or someone with a weakened immune system, call a health care provider if illness:Salmonella bacteria live in the intestines of people, animals and birds. Most people are infected with salmonella by consuming food or water that has been contaminated by feces.Commonly infected foods include:Many foods become contaminated when prepared by people who don't wash their hands thoroughly after using the toilet or changing a diaper or after handling contaminated food.Infection can also occur if people touch something that is contaminated and then put their fingers in their mouths.Animals and pets, especially birds and reptiles, may carry salmonella bacteria on their feathers, fur or skin or in their feces. Some pet foods may be contaminated with salmonella and can infect animals.Factors that may increase your risk of salmonella infection include:The body has many natural defenses against salmonella infection. For example, strong stomach acid can kill many types of salmonella bacteria. But some medical problems or medications can short-circuit these natural defenses.Examples include:Some medical problems or medications appear to increase your risk of catching salmonella by weakening your immune system. This interferes with your body's ability to fight infection and disease. Examples include:Salmonella infection usually isn't life-threatening. However, in certain people — especially infants and young children, older adults, transplant recipients, pregnant women, and people with weakened immune systems — the development of complications can be dangerous.If you can't drink enough to replace the fluid you're losing from diarrhea, you may become dehydrated. Warning signs include:If salmonella infection enters your bloodstream (bacteremia), it can infect tissues throughout your body, including:People who have had salmonella are at higher risk of developing reactive arthritis from salmonella infection. Also known as Reiter's syndrome, reactive arthritis typically causes:The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) oversees and updates inspection, sampling and testing programs for poultry and meat. The purpose is to cut the number of salmonella infections in the United States.You can avoid getting salmonella and spreading bacteria to others in several ways, including safely preparing food, hand-washing, avoiding contamination, and not eating raw meat, dairy or egg products.Preventive methods are especially important when preparing food or providing care for infants, older adults and people with weakened immune systems.Washing your hands thoroughly can help prevent the transfer of salmonella bacteria to your mouth or to any food you're preparing. Wash your hands with soap and water for 20 seconds after you:To prevent cross-contamination:Homemade cookie dough, ice cream, mayonnaise, hollandaise sauce and eggnog all contain raw eggs. If you must consume raw eggs, make sure they've been pasteurized.Be sure to cook food thoroughly and refrigerate or freeze food promptly.Apr 29, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.