Sarcoidosis is a disease characterized by the growth of tiny collections of inflammatory cells (granulomas) in any part of your body — most commonly the lungs and lymph nodes. But it can also affect the eyes, skin, heart and other organs.The cause of sarcoidosis is unknown, but experts think it results from the body's immune system responding to an unknown substance. Some research suggests that infectious agents, chemicals, dust and a potential abnormal reaction to the body's own proteins (self-proteins) could be responsible for the formation of granulomas in people who are genetically predisposed.There is no cure for sarcoidosis, but most people do very well with no treatment or only modest treatment. In some cases, sarcoidosis goes away on its own. However, sarcoidosis may last for years and may cause organ damage.Signs and symptoms of sarcoidosis vary depending on which organs are affected. Sarcoidosis sometimes develops gradually and produces symptoms that last for years. Other times, symptoms appear suddenly and then disappear just as quickly. Many people with sarcoidosis have no symptoms, so the disease may be discovered only when a chest X-ray is done for another reason.Sarcoidosis can begin with these signs and symptoms:Sarcoidosis most often affects the lungs and may cause lung problems, such as:Sarcoidosis may cause skin problems, which may include:Sarcoidosis can affect the eyes without causing any symptoms, so it's important to have your eyes checked regularly. When eye signs and symptoms do occur, they may include:Signs and symptoms related to cardiac sarcoidosis may include:Sarcoidosis can also affect calcium metabolism, the nervous system, the liver and spleen, muscles, bones and joints, the kidneys, lymph nodes, or any other organ.See your doctor if you have signs and symptoms of sarcoidosis.— Jim, patient, sarcoidosisJim, patient: We were given two beautiful grandkids there shortly after retirement. They are two special little girls and that really makes life nice. I never had a symptom until that first day of the actual heart attack. I was 100 percent blocked.Diana, spouse: They put 2 or 3 stents in — the doctors would — and then within months, Jim would have the same kind of symptoms again.Jim: I was in the hospital again and this time, it was open-heart surgery.Diana: Oh, my gosh, when he opened Jim up, he said I've seen something today that I've never seen on anybody.Jim: It was discovered at that time that I had sarcoidosis.Diana: You're going to have to go to the Mayo Clinic.Leslie Cooper, M.D., Mayo Clinic Cardiology: He had rapid re-narrowing to the arteries to his heart after they had placed stents. In his case, they were related to an autoimmune disease, sarcoidosis.Diana: The treatment, the doctors, the teamwork was unbelievable.Leslie Cooper, M.D.: We took an established drug in another area and applied it for the first time in cardiac sarcoidosis.Diana: It was experimental, but it put that sarcoid into remission and that gave Jim his life back. It turned out to be a really good risk.Jim: I didn't realize that the Mayo Clinic was so accessible. When I go there I have no doubt that I'm going to meet competent people in their work and their field. That, I think, gives you the confidence to trust that you are going to be okay. My experience at Mayo I think has helped me be here for my grandkids. I'm just so thankful to be here.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesDoctors don't know the exact cause of sarcoidosis. Some people appear to have a genetic predisposition to develop the disease, which may be triggered by bacteria, viruses, dust or chemicals.This triggers an overreaction of your immune system, and immune cells begin to collect in a pattern of inflammation called granulomas. As granulomas build up in an organ, the function of that organ can be affected.While anyone can develop sarcoidosis, factors that may increase your risk include:Sometimes sarcoidosis causes long-term problems.Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Transplants support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.1606 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 15 Replies Fri, Jun 21, 2024 100 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Jim, patient:Diana, spouse:Jim:Diana:Jim:Diana:Leslie Cooper, M.D., Mayo Clinic Cardiology:Diana:Leslie Cooper, M.D.:Diana:Jim:Age and sex.Race.Family history.Lungs.Eyes.Kidneys.Heart.Nervous system.Advertising & Sponsorship