Scabies is caused by tiny mites that burrow into the skin.Scabies is an itchy skin rash caused by a tiny burrowing mite called Sarcoptes scabiei. Intense itching occurs in the area where the mite burrows. The need to scratch may be stronger at night.Scabies is contagious and can spread quickly through close person-to-person contact in a family, child care group, school class, nursing home or prison. Because scabies spreads so easily, health care providers often recommend treating the entire family or any close contacts.Scabies is easily treated. Medicated skin creams or pills kill the mites that cause scabies and their eggs. But itching may not stop for many weeks after treatment.Scabies symptoms include:Scabies is often found in the skin folds. But scabies can appear on many parts of the body. In adults and older children, scabies is most often found:In infants and young children, common sites of scabies usually include the:If you've had scabies before, symptoms may start within a few days of exposure. If you've never had scabies, it can take as long as six weeks for symptoms to start. You can still spread scabies even if you don't have any symptoms yet.Talk to your health care provider if you have any symptoms of scabies.Many skin conditions, such as dermatitis or eczema, also can cause itching and small bumps on the skin. Your health care provider can find the exact cause of your symptoms so that you receive the right treatment. Antihistamines or nonprescription lotions may ease itching. But they won't get rid of the mites or their eggs.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesScabies is caused by a tiny, eight-legged mite. The female mite burrows just under the skin and makes a tunnel where it lays eggs.The eggs hatch, and the mite larvae travel to the surface of the skin, where they mature. These mites can then spread to other areas of the skin or to the skin of other people. Itching is caused by the body's allergic reaction to the mites, their eggs and their waste.Close skin-to-skin contact and, less often, sharing clothing or bedding with a person who has scabies can spread the mites.Pets don't spread scabies to humans. The scabies mites that affect animals don't survive or reproduce in people.However, coming in contact with an animal that has scabies may cause brief itching if the mite gets under the skin. But within a few days, the mite will die. So treatment isn't needed.Scratching too much can break your skin and cause an infection, such as impetigo. Impetigo is an infection on the skin's surface that's caused most often by staph bacteria (staphylococci) or sometimes by strep bacteria (streptococci).A more severe type of scabies, called crusted scabies, may affect certain people, including:Crusted scabies makes the skin crusty and scaly, and affects large areas of the body. It's very contagious and can be hard to treat. Quick treatment with both a prescription pill and a skin cream is needed.Typically, someone with scabies has about 10 to 15 mites. But someone with crusted scabies may have millions of mites. Yet itching may not occur or may be mild.To prevent scabies from coming back and to keep the mites from spreading to other people, take these steps:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Wash all clothes and linen.Starve the mites.Clean and vacuum.Advertising & Sponsorship