Schizophrenia is a serious mental health condition that affects how people think, feel and behave. It may result in a mix of hallucinations, delusions, and disorganized thinking and behavior. Hallucinations involve seeing things or hearing voices that aren't observed by others. Delusions involve firm beliefs about things that are not true. People with schizophrenia can seem to lose touch with reality, which can make daily living very hard.People with schizophrenia need lifelong treatment. This includes medicine, talk therapy and help in learning how to manage daily life activities.Because many people with schizophrenia don't know they have a mental health condition and may not believe they need treatment, many research studies have examined the results of untreated psychosis. People who have psychosis that is not treated often have more-severe symptoms, more stays in a hospital, poorer thinking and processing skills and social outcomes, injuries, and even death. On the other hand, early treatment often helps control symptoms before serious complications arise, making the long-term outlook better.Schizophrenia involves a range of problems in how people think, feel and behave. Symptoms may include:Symptoms can vary in type and how severe they are. At times, symptoms may get better or worse. Some symptoms may be present at all times.People with schizophrenia usually are diagnosed in the late teen years to early 30s. In men, schizophrenia symptoms usually start in the late teens to early 20s. In women, symptoms usually begin in the late 20s to early 30s. There also is a group of people — usually women — who are diagnosed later in life. It isn't common for children to be diagnosed with schizophrenia.Schizophrenia symptoms in teenagers are like those in adults, but the condition may be harder to pinpoint. That's because some early symptoms of schizophrenia — those that occur before hallucinations, delusions and disorganization — are commonly seen in many teens, such as:Also, the use of recreational drugs, such as marijuana, stimulants like cocaine and methamphetamines, or hallucinogens, can cause similar symptoms. Compared with adults with schizophrenia, teens with the condition may be less likely to have delusions and more likely to have hallucinations.People with schizophrenia often don't know that they have a mental condition that needs medical attention. As a result, family or friends often need to get them help.If people you know have symptoms of schizophrenia, talk to them about your concerns. While you can't force them to seek help, you can offer encouragement and support. You also can help them find a healthcare professional or mental health professional.If people are a danger to themselves or others, or they don't have food, clothing or shelter, you may need to call 911 in the U.S. or other emergency responders for help. A mental health professional needs to evaluate them.Some people may need an emergency stay in a hospital. Laws on mental health treatment against a person's will vary by state. You can contact community mental health agencies or police departments in your area for details.Suicidal thoughts and attempts are much higher than average in people with schizophrenia. If a person is in danger of suicide or has made a suicide attempt, make sure that someone stays with that person. Contact a suicide hotline. In the U.S., call or text 988 to reach the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline, available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Or use the Lifeline Chat. Services are free and confidential. The Suicide & Crisis Lifeline in the U.S. has a Spanish language phone line at 1-888-628-9454 (toll-free).Proper treatment of schizophrenia can reduce the risk of suicide.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesIt isn't known what causes schizophrenia. But researchers believe that a mix of genetics, brain chemistry and environment can play a part.Changes in certain naturally occurring brain chemicals, including neurotransmitters called dopamine and glutamate, may play a part in schizophrenia. Neuroimaging studies show changes in the brain structure and central nervous systems of people with schizophrenia. While researchers haven't yet been able to apply these findings to new treatments, the findings show that schizophrenia is a brain disease.Although the cause of schizophrenia is not known, these factors seem to make schizophrenia more likely:Left untreated, schizophrenia can lead to severe problems that affect every area of life.Complications that schizophrenia may cause or be related to include:There's no sure way to prevent schizophrenia. But staying with your treatment plan can help stop symptoms from returning or getting worse. Researchers hope that learning more about risk factors for schizophrenia may lead to earlier diagnosis and treatment.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Delusions.Hallucinations.Disorganized speech and thinking.Extremely disorganized or unusual motor behavior.Negative symptoms.Advertising & Sponsorship