Schizoaffective disorder is a mental health condition that is marked by a mix of schizophrenia symptoms, such as hallucinations and delusions, and mood disorder symptoms, such as depression, mania and a milder form of mania called hypomania. Hallucinations involve seeing things or hearing voices that others don't observe. Delusions involve believing things that are not real or not true.The two types of schizoaffective disorder — both of which include some symptoms of schizophrenia — are:Schizoaffective disorder may affect people differently.Schizoaffective disorder changes how people think, feel and act. When it isn't treated, the condition can make it hard to function at work or school or in social settings. It also can cause loneliness. People with schizoaffective disorder may need help and support to live their daily lives. Treatment can help manage symptoms and make quality of life better.Schizoaffective disorder symptoms may vary from person to person. People with the condition have psychotic symptoms, such as hallucinations and delusions. They also can have symptoms of a mood disorder. This type of schizophrenia could be the bipolar type, which features bouts of mania and sometimes depression. Or it could be the depressive type, which features bouts of depression.How schizoaffective disorder starts and how it affects people may vary. But defining features include a major bout of depressed or manic mood and at least a two-week period of psychotic symptoms when mood symptoms are not present.Symptoms of schizoaffective disorder depend on the type — bipolar or depressive. Symptoms may include:If you think someone you know may have schizoaffective disorder symptoms, talk with that person about your concerns. Although you can't force someone to seek professional help, you can offer encouragement and support and help find a healthcare professional or mental health professional. If you're concerned about a loved one's safety or ability to get food, clothing or shelter, you may need to contact emergency responders, a mental health hotline or a social service agency to get help from a mental health professional.A person with schizoaffective disorder may talk about or attempt suicide. If you have a loved one who is in danger of suicide or has attempted suicide, make sure someone stays with that person. Contact a suicide hotline. In the U.S., call or text 988 to reach the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline, available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Or use the Lifeline Chat. Services are free and confidential. The Suicide & Crisis Lifeline in the U.S. has a Spanish language phone line at 1-888-628-9454 (toll-free).While it isn't known what causes schizoaffective disorder, genes that are passed down through families likely play a part.Factors that raise the risk of developing schizoaffective disorder include:People with schizoaffective disorder are at a greater risk of:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Bipolar type,Depressive type,Advertising & Sponsorship