The sciatic nerve is the confluence of nerve roots from the lower back. The sciatic nerve extends from the buttocks down each leg.Sciatica refers to pain that travels along the path of the sciatic nerve. The sciatic nerve travels from the buttocks and down each leg.Sciatica most often happens when a herniated disk or an overgrowth of bone puts pressure on the lumbar spine nerve roots. This happens "upstream" from the sciatic nerve. This causes inflammation, pain and often some numbness in the affected leg.Although the pain associated with sciatica can be serious, those cases that are caused by a herniated disk can clear up with treatment in a few weeks to months. People who have severe sciatica and serious leg weakness or bowel or bladder changes might need surgery.Sciatica pain can be almost anywhere along the nerve pathway. It's especially likely to follow a path from the low back to the buttock and the back of a thigh and calf.The pain can vary from a mild ache to a sharp, burning pain. Sometimes it feels like a jolt or electric shock. It can be worse when coughing or sneezing or sitting a long time. Usually, sciatica affects only one side of the body.Some people also have numbness, tingling, or muscle weakness in the leg or foot. One part of the leg can be in pain, while another part can feel numb.Mild sciatica usually goes away over time. Call your primary care professional if self-care measures don't ease symptoms. Also call if pain lasts longer than a week, is severe or gets worse. Get immediate medical care for:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe disks that lie between the vertebrae in the spine consist of a soft center (nucleus) surrounded by a tougher exterior (annulus). A herniated disk occurs when a portion of the nucleus pushes through a crack in the annulus. Symptoms may occur if the herniation compresses a nerve.Sciatica occurs when the nerve roots to the sciatic nerve become pinched. The cause is usually a herniated disk in the spine or an overgrowth of bone, sometimes called bone spurs, on the spinal bones. More rarely, a tumor can put pressure on the nerve.Risk factors for sciatica include:Most people recover fully from sciatica caused by herniated disks, often without treatment. But sciatica can damage nerves. Seek immediate medical attention for:It's not always possible to prevent sciatica, and the condition can come back. To protect your back:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Age.Obesity.Occupation.Prolonged sitting.Diabetes.Exercise regularly.Keep good posture when sitting.Use your body correctly.Advertising & Sponsorship