Scleroderma (sklair-oh-DUR-muh), also known as systemic sclerosis, is a group of rare diseases that involve the hardening and tightening of the skin. Scleroderma also may cause problems in the blood vessels, internal organs and digestive tract.Scleroderma is often categorized as limited or diffuse, which refers only to the degree of skin involvement. Both types can involve any of the other vascular or organ symptoms that are part of the disease. Localized scleroderma, also known as morphea, affects only the skin.While there is no cure for scleroderma, treatments can ease symptoms, slow progression and improve quality of life.Scleroderma symptoms vary from person to person, depending on which parts of the body are affected.Nearly everyone who has scleroderma experiences hardening and tightening of the skin.The first parts of the body to be affected are usually the fingers, hands, feet and face. In some people, the skin thickening also can involve the forearms, upper arms, chest, abdomen, lower legs and thighs. Early symptoms may include swelling and itchiness. The color of affected skin can become lighter or darker, and skin may look shiny because of the tightness.Some people also have small red spots, called telangiectasia, on their hands and face. Calcium deposits can form under the skin, particularly at the fingertips, causing bumps that can be seen on X-rays.Raynaud's phenomenon is common in scleroderma. It happens because of an exaggerated contraction of the small blood vessels in the fingers and toes in response to cold temperatures or emotional distress. When this happens, the digits may feel painful or numb and turn white, blue, gray or red. Raynaud's phenomenon also can occur in people who don't have scleroderma.Scleroderma can affect any part of the digestive system, from the esophagus to the rectum. Depending on which parts of the digestive system are affected, symptoms may include:When scleroderma affects the heart or lungs, it can cause shortness of breath, decreased exercise tolerance and dizziness. Scleroderma can cause scarring in the lung tissues that may result in increasing shortness of breath over time. There are medicines that may help slow the progression of this lung damage.Scleroderma also can cause the blood pressure to increase in the circulation that goes between the heart and the lungs. This is called pulmonary hypertension. In addition to causing shortness of breath, pulmonary hypertension also can cause excess fluid to build up in the legs, feet and sometimes around the heart.When scleroderma affects the heart, heartbeats can become irregular. Heart failure also may happen in some people.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesScleroderma happens when the body produces too much collagen and it builds up in body tissues. Collagen is a fibrous type of protein that makes up the body's connective tissues, including the skin.Experts don't know exactly what causes this process to begin, but the body's immune system appears to play a role. Most likely, scleroderma is caused by a combination of factors, including immune system problems, genetics and environmental triggers.Anyone can get scleroderma, but it is more common in people assigned female at birth. People typically get scleroderma between ages 30 and 50. Black people often have earlier onset and are more likely to have more skin involvement and lung disease.Several other combined factors appear to influence the risk of having scleroderma:Scleroderma complications range from mild to serious and can affect the:Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Transplants support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.1606 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 15 Replies Fri, Jun 21, 2024 100 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Genetics.Environmental triggers.Immune system conditions.Fingertips.Lungs.Kidneys.Heart.Teeth.Digestive system.Joints.Advertising & Sponsorship