The bark scorpion is commonly found in the desert Southwest part of the U.S.Scorpion stings are painful but rarely life-threatening. Healthy adults usually don't need treatment for scorpion stings. Young children and older adults are most at risk of serious complications.Scorpions are arthropods — a relative of insects, spiders and crustaceans. Bark scorpions — the only scorpion species in the U.S. with venom strong enough to cause serious symptoms — are generally about 1.6 to 3 inches (4 to 8 cm) long, including a segmented tail with a stinger that can deliver venom. They're found mainly in the desert Southwest. Worldwide, of more than 2,000 species of scorpions, about 100 produce venom serious enough to be fatal.Scorpions have eight legs and a pair of lobster-like pinchers and a tail that curves up. They're generally more active at night. They usually won't sting unless provoked or attacked. Most stings occur when they're accidentally grabbed or stepped on or brushed against the body.Symptoms at the site of a scorpion sting may include:Symptoms from venom that affect the whole body — usually in children who are stung — include:As with other stinging insects, such as bees and wasps, it is possible for people who have been stung by scorpions before to have allergic reactions when stung later. Reactions to these later stings are sometimes serious enough to cause a life-threatening condition called anaphylaxis. Symptoms in these cases are like those of anaphylaxis caused by bee stings, including hives, trouble breathing, and nausea and vomiting.Contact your local poison control center at once if a child is stung by a scorpion. To reach a poison control center in the U.S., call Poison Help at 800-222-1222. Also, seek medical care if you've been stung and begin to have a hard time breathing or other symptoms that continue for more than a week. If you're concerned about a scorpion sting, you also can call your local poison control center for advice.A scorpion sting is caused by the stinger in a scorpion's tail. When a scorpion stings, its stinger can release venom. The venom contains a complex mix of toxins that affect the nervous system. These are called neurotoxins.Your risk of a scorpion sting rises if you:The very old and the very young are most likely to die of untreated venomous scorpion stings. The cause is usually heart or lung failure that occurs some hours after the sting. Very few deaths from scorpion stings have been reported in the U.S.Rarely, scorpion stings can cause a serious allergic reaction called anaphylaxis.Scorpions tend to avoid contact. If you live in an area where scorpions are common, consider these steps to prevent chance meetings:Scorpions glow under a black light, so you might want to use one at night to look at what's around you. If you find a scorpion, use tongs to gently move it away from people.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Live or travel where scorpions are.Work, hike or camp where scorpions are.Remove pilesKeep grass closely mowed,Caulk cracks,Inspect and shake outTake steps when you're traveling.Advertising & Sponsorship