Scrotal masses are lumps or swelling in the scrotum, the bag of skin that holds the testicles.Scrotal masses might be:It's key to get a scrotal mass checked by a health care professional, even if you don't have pain or other symptoms. Some masses could be cancer. Or they could be caused by another medical condition that affects the health of the testicles and how well they work.Each month, check your scrotum for any changes. Also get the area checked during regular health checkups. This can help you spot masses early, when many treatments work better.The male reproductive system makes, stores and moves sperm. The testicles produce sperm. Fluid from the seminal vesicles and prostate gland combines with sperm to make semen. The penis ejaculates semen during sexual intercourse.Symptoms of scrotal masses vary. Some cause pain and others don't. It depends on the cause. Symptoms of a scrotal mass might include:If an infection causes a scrotal mass, symptoms also might include:Get emergency medical care if you have sudden pain in your scrotum. Some problems need to be treated right away to help prevent permanent damage to a testicle.See a health care professional if you notice a lump in your scrotum or other unusual changes. Get a checkup even if you have a mass that isn't painful or tender.Some scrotal masses are more common in children. See your child's pediatrician or other health care professional if:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesA spermatocele is a typically painless, noncancerous (benign), fluid-filled sac that grows near the top of a testicle.Hydrocele is the type of scrotal swelling that occurs when fluid collects in the thin sheath that surrounds the testicle.A varicocele is enlargement of the veins that transport oxygen-depleted blood away from the testicle.Inguinal hernias occur when part of the membrane lining the abdominal cavity (omentum) or intestine protrudes through a weak spot in the abdomen — often along the inguinal canal, which carries the spermatic cord in men.Many health conditions can cause a scrotal mass or an unusual change in the scrotum. These include:Epididymitis. This is when the coiled tube at the back of the testicle, called the epididymis, becomes inflamed.Often, epididymitis is caused by an infection with bacteria. For instance, bacterial infections that spread through sex, such as chlamydia, can cause it. Less often, a virus can lead to epididymitis.Hydrocele. This is when extra fluid collects between the layers of a sac that surrounds each testicle. Most often, there's a small amount of fluid in this space. But the excess fluid of a hydrocele can lead to a painless swelling of the scrotum.In adults, a hydrocele can happen because of an imbalance in the amounts of fluid made or absorbed. Often, this is due to an injury or infection in the scrotum.In babies, a hydrocele tends to happen because an opening between the stomach area and the scrotum hasn't properly closed during development.Inguinal hernia. This is when part of the small intestine pushes through an opening or weak spot in the tissue that separates the stomach area and groin. It might appear as a mass in the scrotum or higher in the groin.In infants, an inguinal hernia often happens before birth when the passageway from the stomach area to the scrotum doesn't close.Things that can raise the risk of a scrotal mass include:Not all scrotal masses lead to long-term medical conditions. But any mass that affects the health or function of the testicle can result in:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Testicular cancer.Spermatocele.Epididymitis.Orchitis.Hydrocele.Hematocele.Varicocele.Inguinal hernia.Testicular torsion.Undescended testicle.Conditions present at birth.History of testicular cancer.Advertising & Sponsorship