Secondary high blood pressure (secondary hypertension) is high blood pressure that's caused by another medical condition. It can be caused by conditions that affect the kidneys, arteries, heart or endocrine system. Secondary hypertension can also occur during pregnancy.Secondary hypertension differs from the usual type of high blood pressure (primary hypertension or essential hypertension), which is often called simply high blood pressure.Proper treatment of secondary hypertension can often control both the high blood pressure and the condition that causes it. Effective treatment reduces the risk of serious complications — including heart disease, kidney failure and stroke.Like primary hypertension, secondary hypertension usually has no specific symptoms, even if blood pressure has reached dangerously high levels.For people diagnosed with high blood pressure, having any of these signs may mean the condition is secondary hypertension:If you have a condition that can cause secondary hypertension, you may need your blood pressure checked more frequently. Ask your health care provider how often to have your blood pressure checked.Many health conditions can cause secondary hypertension. Several kidney diseases may cause secondary hypertension, including:Renovascular hypertension. This type of high blood pressure is caused by narrowing (stenosis) of one or both arteries leading to the kidneys.Renovascular hypertension is often caused by the same type of fatty plaques that can damage the coronary arteries (atherosclerosis) or a separate condition in which the muscle and fibrous tissues of the renal artery wall thicken and harden into rings (fibromuscular dysplasia).Medical conditions affecting hormone levels also may cause secondary hypertension. These conditions include:Other possible causes of secondary hypertension include:Sleep apnea. In this condition, often marked by severe snoring, breathing repeatedly stops and starts during sleep, causing a lack of oxygen.Not getting enough oxygen may damage the lining of the blood vessel walls, which may make it harder for the blood vessels to control blood pressure. Also, sleep apnea causes part of the nervous system to be overactive and release certain chemicals that increase blood pressure.Obesity. As body weight increases, the amount of blood flowing through the body increases. This increase in blood flow puts added pressure on artery walls, increasing blood pressure.Being overweight also increases the heart rate and makes it harder for the blood vessels to move blood. In addition, fat deposits can release chemicals that raise blood pressure.Medications and supplements. Various prescription medications — such as pain relievers, birth control pills, antidepressants and drugs used after organ transplants — can cause or worsen high blood pressure in some people.Some decongestants and herbal supplements, including ginseng, licorice and ephedra (ma-huang), may have the same effect. Many illegal drugs, such as cocaine and methamphetamine, also increase blood pressure.The greatest risk factor for developing secondary hypertension is having a medical condition that can cause high blood pressure, such as kidney, artery, heart or endocrine system problems.Secondary hypertension can worsen the underlying medical condition that's causing the high blood pressure. Without treatment, secondary hypertension can lead to other health problems, such as:Metabolic syndrome. This syndrome is a cluster of disorders of the body's metabolism — including increased waist circumference, high triglycerides, low high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol (the "good" cholesterol), high blood pressure and high insulin levels.If you have high blood pressure, you're more likely to have other components of metabolic syndrome. The more components you have, the greater your risk of developing diabetes, heart disease or stroke.Aug 09, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.