A seizure is a sudden, uncontrolled burst of electrical activity in the brain. It can cause changes in behavior, movements, feelings and levels of consciousness. Having two or more seizures at least 24 hours apart that don't have a known cause is considered to be epilepsy.There are many types of seizures, and they have a range of symptoms and severity. Seizure types vary by where they begin in the brain and how far they spread. Most seizures last from 30 seconds to two minutes. A seizure that lasts longer than five minutes is a medical emergency.Seizures can happen after a stroke or a head injury. They also may be caused by an infection such as meningitis or another illness. Many times, though, the cause is unknown.Most seizures can be controlled with medicine. However, managing seizures can affect your daily life. You can work with your health care professional to balance seizure control and medicine side effects.Symptoms vary based on the type of seizure. They also can range from mild to severe. Seizure symptoms may include:A classification system distinguishes the different types of seizures. Health care professionals typically classify seizures as focal or generalized. Seizures are classified based on how and where the brain activity causing the seizure began. If health care professionals don't know how the seizures began, they may classify the seizures as unknown onset.Focal seizures result from electrical activity in one area of the brain. This type of seizure can occur with or without loss of consciousness:Focal seizures without impaired awareness. These seizures may alter emotions. They also may change the way things look, smell, feel, taste or sound. But the seizures don't cause a loss of consciousness.During these types of seizures, people may suddenly feel angry, joyful or sad. Some people have nausea or unusual feelings that are hard to describe. These seizures may result in trouble speaking and involuntary jerking of a body part such as an arm or a leg. They also may cause sudden sensory symptoms such as tingling, dizziness and seeing flashing lights.Symptoms of focal seizures may be confused with other conditions of the brain or nervous system. They include migraine, narcolepsy or mental illness.Seizures that appear to involve all areas of the brain from the time they start are called generalized seizures. Different types of generalized seizures include:Seizures can have a beginning phase, middle phase and end phase.Prodrome. This is the earliest warning that a seizure may occur, but it is not part of the seizure itself. During the prodrome, people may have a hard-to-describe sense that a seizure may happen. They also may have changes in behavior. This can happen in the hours or even days before a seizure.The prodrome stage may include an aura. The aura is the first symptom of a seizure. Symptoms during the aura may include the feeling that a person or place is familiar, known as deja vu, or a feeling that a person or place is not familiar. Or people may simply feel strange, feel fear or panic, or even have pleasant feelings. Symptoms also may include smells, sounds, tastes, blurred vision or racing thoughts. The prodrome may include a headache, numbness or tingling, nausea, or dizziness.Many people with seizures have a prodrome or aura as part of their experience, but some people do not.Postictal. This is the period after a seizure during recovery. The postictal stage can last minutes or hours. Some people recover quickly while others take hours. The length of the postictal stage depends on the type of seizure and what part of the brain was affected.During this phase, people may be slow to respond, have trouble with memory, and have trouble talking or writing. They may feel sleepy, confused, dizzy, sad, scared, anxious or frustrated. They also may have nausea, a headache, weakness, feel thirsty or have a loss of bladder control.Seek immediate medical help if you have a seizure or if you see someone have a seizure and any of the following occurs:If you experience a seizure for the first time, seek medical advice.Nerve cells in the brain, known as neurons, create, send and receive electrical impulses. This allows the cells to communicate. Anything that disrupts the communication pathways can lead to a seizure. Some types of seizures may be caused by genetic changes.The most common cause of seizures is epilepsy. But not every person who has a seizure has epilepsy. Sometimes seizures may be caused or triggered by:Having a seizure can sometimes lead to complications that are dangerous for you or others. You might be at risk of:Seizures care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Focal seizures with impaired awareness.Focal seizures without impaired awareness.Absence seizures.Tonic seizures.Atonic seizures.Clonic seizures.Myoclonic seizures.Tonic-clonic seizures.Prodrome.Ictal.Postictal.Falling.Drowning.Car accidents.Pregnancy complications.Mental health issues.Advertising & Sponsorship