Septic arthritis is a painful infection in a joint that can come from germs that travel through your bloodstream from another part of your body. Septic arthritis can also occur when a penetrating injury, such as an animal bite or trauma, delivers germs directly into the joint.Infants and older adults are most likely to develop septic arthritis. People who have artificial joints are also at risk of septic arthritis. Knees are most commonly affected, but septic arthritis also can affect hips, shoulders and other joints. The infection can quickly and severely damage the cartilage and bone within the joint, so prompt treatment is crucial.Treatment involves draining the joint with a needle or during surgery. Antibiotics also are usually needed.Septic arthritis typically causes extreme discomfort and difficulty using the affected joint. The joint could be swollen, red and warm, and you might have a fever.If septic arthritis occurs in an artificial joint (prosthetic joint infection), signs and symptoms such as minor pain and swelling may develop months or years after knee replacement or hip replacement surgery. Also, a loosening of the joint may occur, which causes pain while moving the joint or while putting weight on the joint. Typically, the pain goes away when at rest. In extreme cases, the joint may become dislocated.See your doctor if you have severe pain in a joint that comes on suddenly. Prompt treatment can help minimize joint damage.If you have an artificial joint, see your doctor if you experience pain while using the joint.Septic arthritis can be caused by bacterial, viral or fungal infections. Bacterial infection with Staphylococcus aureus (staph) is the most common cause. Staph commonly lives on even healthy skin.Septic arthritis can develop when an infection, such as a skin infection or urinary tract infection, spreads through your bloodstream to a joint. Less commonly, a puncture wound, drug injection, or surgery in or near a joint — including joint replacement surgery — can give the germs entry into the joint space.The lining of your joints has little ability to protect itself from infection. Your body's reaction to the infection — including inflammation that can increase pressure and reduce blood flow within the joint — contributes to the damage.Risk factors for septic arthritis include:Having a combination of risk factors puts you at greater risk than having just one risk factor does.If treatment is delayed, septic arthritis can lead to joint degeneration and permanent damage. If septic arthritis affects an artificial joint, complications may include joint loosening or dislocation.Nov 24, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.