In rare instances, headaches can be brought on by sexual activity — especially with orgasm. You may notice a dull ache in the head and neck that builds up as sexual excitement increases. Or, more commonly, you may experience a sudden, severe headache just before or during orgasm.Most sex headaches are nothing to worry about. But some can be a sign of something serious, such as problems with the blood vessels that feed the brain.There are two types of sex headaches:In some people, both types of headaches are combined.Most sex headaches last at least several minutes. Others may linger for hours or even 2 to 3 days.Many people who have sex headaches will experience them in clusters over a few months, and then they may go for a year or more without having any. Up to half of all people with sex headaches experience them over the course of about six months. Some people may only have one attack during their lives.Sex headaches aren't usually a cause for concern. But consult your health care provider right away if you experience a headache during sexual activity — especially if it begins abruptly or it's your first headache of this type.Any type of sexual activity that leads to orgasm can trigger sex headaches.Abrupt-onset and slow-to-build sex headaches can be primary headache disorders not associated with any underlying condition. Sex headaches that come on suddenly are more likely to be associated with:Sex headaches associated with loss of consciousness, vomiting, stiff neck, other neurological symptoms and severe pain lasting more than 24 hours are more likely to be due to an underlying cause.Sex headaches can affect anyone. But risk factors for these headaches include:Sometimes sex headaches can be prevented by stopping sexual activity before orgasm. Taking a more passive role during sex also may help.May 13, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.