Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) are caused by sexually transmitted infections (STIs). They are spread mainly by sexual contact. STIs are caused by bacteria, viruses or parasites. A sexually transmitted infection may pass from person to person in blood, semen, or vaginal and other bodily fluids.Sometimes sexually transmitted infections are spread in ways other than sexual contact. For example, STIs can spread to infants during pregnancy or childbirth. STIs also can spread through blood transfusions or shared needles.STIs don't always cause symptoms. A person can get sexually transmitted infections from another person who seems healthy and may not even know they have an infection.STDs can have a range of symptoms, including no symptoms. That's why sexually transmitted infections may go unnoticed until a person has complications or a partner is diagnosed.STI symptoms might include:Sexually transmitted infection symptoms may appear a few days after exposure. But it may take years before you have any noticeable problems, depending on what's causing the STI.See a health care professional immediately if:Make an appointment with a health care professional:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesSexually transmitted infections can be caused by:Anyone who is sexually active risks getting or spreading an STD.Factors that may increase the risk of getting an sexually transmitted infection include:Having unprotected sex. Vaginal or anal sex with an infected partner who isn't wearing a condom (latex or polyurethane) greatly increases the risk of getting an STD. Condoms made from natural membranes aren't recommended because they're not effective at preventing some STIs. Not using condoms properly or not using them each time also can increase risk.Oral sex may be less risky. But sexually transmitted infections can still spread if a person doesn't use a condom (latex or polyurethane) or a dental dam. That is a thin, square piece of rubber made with latex or silicone.During pregnancy or delivery, some sexually transmitted infections can be passed from mother to infant. Examples are gonorrhea, chlamydia, HIV and syphilis. STIs in infants can cause serious problems or even death. All pregnant women should be screened for STI infections and treated as needed.Many people in the early stages of an STD have no symptoms. That's why screening is important to prevent complications.Possible complications of sexually transmitted infections include:There are many ways to avoid or lower your risk of getting an STD.Use condoms and dental dams consistently and correctly. Use a new latex or polyurethane condom or dental dam for each sex act, whether oral, vaginal or anal. Never use an oil-based lubricant, such as petroleum jelly, with a latex condom or dental dam. Also, these types of barriers give less protection for STDs involving exposed genital sores, such as HPV or herpes.Nonbarrier forms of contraception, such as birth control pills or intrauterine devices (IUDs), don't protect against STIs.Your health care professional will prescribe these medicines for HIV prevention only if you don't already have HIV. You'll need an HIV test before you start taking PrEP and then every three months as long as you're taking it.Your health care professional also will test your kidney function before prescribing Truvada. They will then test your kidney function every six months. If you have hepatitis B, see an infectious disease specialist or liver specialist before starting therapy.According to the CDC, if you use Truvada daily, you can lower your risk of getting HIV from sex by about 99%. And you can lower your risk of getting HIV from injection drug use by more than 74%.Research suggests that Descovy is also effective in lowering the risk of getting HIV from sex. But Descovy hasn't been studied in people who have receptive vaginal sex. Using added prevention, such as condoms, can lower your risk even more and prevent other STIs.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Bacteria.Parasites.Viruses.Having unprotected sex.Having sexual contact with many partners.Having a history of STIs.Being forced to engage in sexual activity.Misuse of alcohol or use of recreational drugs.Injecting drugs.Being young.Avoid sex or sexual activity.Stay with one uninfected partner.Wait and test.Get vaccinated.Use condoms and dental dams consistently and correctly.Don't drink alcohol excessively or use illegal drugs.Talk to your partner.Think about male circumcision.Think about using preexposure prophylaxis (PrEP).Advertising & Sponsorship