Shaken baby syndrome is a serious brain injury resulting from forcefully shaking an infant or toddler. It's also known as abusive head trauma, shaken impact syndrome, inflicted head injury or whiplash shaken infant syndrome.Shaken baby syndrome destroys a child's brain cells and prevents his or her brain from getting enough oxygen. This form of child abuse can cause permanent brain damage or death.Shaken baby syndrome is preventable. Help is available for parents who are at risk of harming a child. Parents also can educate other caregivers about the dangers of shaken baby syndrome.Shaken baby syndrome symptoms and signs include:While sometimes there's bruising on the face, you may not see signs of physical injury to the child's outer body. Injuries that might not be immediately seen include bleeding in the brain and eyes, spinal cord damage, and fractures of the ribs, skull, legs and other bones. Many children with shaken baby syndrome show signs and symptoms of prior child abuse.In mild cases of shaken baby syndrome, a child may appear normal after being shaken, but over time they may develop health or behavioral problems.Seek immediate help if you suspect your child has been injured by violent shaking. Call 911 or emergency medical help, or take your child to the nearest emergency room. Getting medical care right away may save your child's life or prevent serious health problems.Health care professionals are legally required to report all suspected cases of child abuse to state authorities.Babies have weak neck muscles and can't support the weight of their heads. If a baby is forcefully shaken, their fragile brain moves back and forth inside the skull. This causes bruising, swelling and bleeding.Shaken baby syndrome usually occurs when a parent or caregiver severely shakes a baby or toddler due to frustration or anger — often because the child won't stop crying.Shaken baby syndrome isn't usually caused by bouncing a child on your knee or minor falls.The following things may increase the risk that parents or caregivers are more likely to forcefully shake a baby and cause shaken baby syndrome:Also, men are more likely to cause shaken baby syndrome than are women.Even brief shaking of an infant can cause irreversible brain damage. Many children affected by shaken baby syndrome die.Survivors of shaken baby syndrome may require lifelong medical care for conditions such as:New parent education classes can help parents better understand the dangers of violent shaking and may provide tips to soothe a crying baby and manage stress.When your crying baby can't be calmed, you may be tempted to try anything to get the tears to stop — but it's important to always treat your child gently. Nothing justifies shaking a child.If you're having trouble managing your emotions or the stress of parenthood, seek help. Your child's doctor may offer a referral to a counselor or other mental health provider.If other people help take care of your child — whether a hired caregiver, sibling or grandparent — make sure they know the dangers of shaken baby syndrome.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship