Shellfish allergy is an atypical response by the body's immune system to proteins in certain marine animals. Marine animals in the shellfish category include crustaceans and mollusks. Examples are shrimp, crabs, lobster, squid, oysters, scallops and snails.Shellfish is a common food allergy. Some people with shellfish allergy react to all shellfish, while others react to only certain kinds. Reactions range from mild symptoms — such as hives or a stuffy nose — to severe and even life-threatening.If you think you have shellfish allergy, talk to your health care provider. Tests can help confirm the allergy so you can take steps to avoid future reactions.Shellfish allergy symptoms generally start within minutes to an hour after eating or having contact with shellfish. They may include:Allergies can cause a severe, potentially life-threatening allergic reaction known as anaphylaxis. It can occur within seconds to minutes after exposure to something you're allergic to — and worsens quickly.An anaphylactic reaction to shellfish is a medical emergency. Anaphylaxis requires immediate treatment with an epinephrine (adrenaline) injection and a follow-up trip to the emergency room. If anaphylaxis isn't treated right away, it can be fatal.Anaphylaxis causes the immune system to release a flood of chemicals that can cause you to go into shock. Signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis include:Seek emergency treatment if you develop signs or symptoms of anaphylaxis.See a health care provider or allergy specialist if you have food allergy symptoms shortly after eating.All food allergies are caused by an immune system overreaction. Your immune system identifies a harmless substance as being harmful. This substance is called an allergen. In shellfish allergy, your immune system mistakenly identifies a certain protein in shellfish as harmful. Your immune system is how your body protects itself, so it produces immunoglobulin E (IgE) antibodies to protect against this allergen. The next time you come in contact with the shellfish protein, these antibodies signal your immune system to release chemicals such as histamine into your bloodstream. This causes a reaction that leads to the symptoms of an allergic reaction.There are several types of shellfish, each containing different proteins:An allergy to crustaceans is the most common type. Some people are allergic to only one type of shellfish but can eat others. Other people with shellfish allergy must avoid all shellfish.An allergy to fish — such as salmon, tuna or catfish — is a different seafood allergy from an allergy to shellfish. Some people who are allergic to shellfish may still be able to eat fish, or they could be allergic to both. Your health care provider can help you determine what is safe to eat.You're at increased risk of developing shellfish allergy if allergies of any type are common in your family.Though people of any age can develop shellfish allergy, it's more common in adults. In fact, shellfish allergy is the most common food allergy in adults. Among adults, shellfish allergy is more common in women. Among children, shellfish allergy is more common in boys.In severe cases, shellfish allergy can lead to anaphylaxis, a dangerous allergic reaction that can be life-threatening.When you have shellfish allergy, you may be at increased risk of anaphylaxis if you have:Anaphylaxis is treated with an emergency injection of epinephrine (adrenaline). If you are at risk of having a severe allergic reaction to shellfish, you always should carry injectable epinephrine (Auvi-Q, EpiPen, others).If you have shellfish allergy, the only way to avoid an allergic reaction is to avoid all shellfish and products that contain shellfish. Even trace amounts of shellfish can cause a severe reaction in some people.Read labels. Cross-contamination can occur in stores where other food is processed or displayed near shellfish and during manufacturing. Shellfish may be in fish stock or seafood flavoring. Read food labels carefully.Shellfish is not usually a hidden ingredient. Companies are required to label any product that contains crustacean shellfish or certain other foods that often cause allergic reactions. However, these regulations don't apply to mollusks.If you have shellfish allergy, talk with your health care provider about carrying emergency epinephrine and how to use it.Consider wearing a medical alert bracelet or necklace that lets others know you have a food allergy.One thing you don't need to worry about is if you'll also be allergic to iodine or radiocontrast material that's used in some imaging tests. Even though shellfish contain small amounts of iodine, shellfish allergy is unrelated to the reactions some people have to radiocontrast material or iodine.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.CrustaceansMollusksBe cautious when dining out.Read labels.Keep your distance.Advertising & Sponsorship