Sick sinus syndrome is a type of heart rhythm disorder. It affects the heart's natural pacemaker (sinus node), which controls the heartbeat. Sick sinus syndrome causes slow heartbeats, pauses (long periods between heartbeats) or irregular heartbeats (arrhythmias).Sick sinus syndrome is relatively uncommon. The risk of developing it increases with age. Many people with sick sinus syndrome eventually need an implanted device called a pacemaker to keep the heart in a regular rhythm.Sick sinus syndrome may also be called sinus node dysfunction or sinus node disease.Most people with sick sinus syndrome have few or no symptoms. Symptoms may be mild or come and go — making them difficult to recognize at first.Signs and symptoms of sick sinus syndrome may include:Talk to your health care provider if you have any signs or symptoms of sick sinus syndrome. Many medical conditions can cause these problems. It's important to get a timely and accurate diagnosis.If you have new or unexplained chest pain or think you're having a heart attack, call for emergency medical help immediately.To understand the cause of sick sinus syndrome, it may be helpful to know how the heart typically beats.The heart is made up of four chambers — two upper (atria) and two lower (ventricles). The rhythm of the heart is typically controlled by the sinus node, an area of specialized cells in the right upper heart chamber (right atrium). In a typical heart rhythm, a tiny cluster of cells at the sinus node sends out an electrical signal. The signal then travels through the atria to the atrioventricular (AV) node and into the ventricles, causing them to contract and pump blood. This natural pacemaker produces electrical signals that trigger each heartbeat. From the sinus node, electrical signals travel across the atria to the ventricles, causing them to contract and pump blood to the lungs and body.Typically, the sinus node creates a steady pace of electrical impulses. The pace changes depending on activity, emotions and other factors.In sick sinus syndrome, the electrical signals are irregularly paced. The heartbeat can be too fast, too slow, interrupted by long pauses — or an alternating combination of these rhythm issues. Sick sinus syndrome is relatively uncommon, but the risk of developing it increases with age.Causes of sick sinus node syndrome can include:Features of sick sinus syndrome include:Sick sinus syndrome can occur at any age. It's most common in people in their 70s or older. Common heart disease risk factors might increase the risk of sick sinus syndrome. Risk factors for heart disease include:Complications of sick sinus syndrome include:Apr 30, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.