Sickle cell anemia is one of a group of inherited disorders known as sickle cell disease. It affects the shape of red blood cells, which carry oxygen to all parts of the body.Red blood cells are usually round and flexible, so they move easily through blood vessels. In sickle cell anemia, some red blood cells are shaped like sickles or crescent moons. These sickle cells also become rigid and sticky, which can slow or block blood flow.The current approach to treatment is to relieve pain and help prevent complications of the disease. However, newer treatments may cure people of the disease. Red blood cells are usually round and flexible. In sickle cell anemia, some red blood cells look like sickles used to cut wheat. These unusually shaped cells give the disease its name. Symptoms of sickle cell anemia usually appear around 6 months of age. They vary from person to person and may change over time. Symptoms can include:Episodes of pain. Periodic episodes of extreme pain, called pain crises, are a major symptom of sickle cell anemia. Pain develops when sickle-shaped red blood cells block blood flow through tiny blood vessels to the chest, abdomen and joints.The pain varies in intensity and can last for a few hours to a few days. Some people have only a few pain crises a year. Others have a dozen or more a year. A severe pain crisis requires a hospital stay.Some people with sickle cell anemia also have chronic pain from bone and joint damage, ulcers, and other causes.See your healthcare professional right away if you or your child has symptoms of sickle cell anemia, including fever or stroke. Infections often start with a fever and can be life-threatening. Because children with sickle cell anemia are prone to infections, seek prompt medical attention for a fever greater than 101.5 degrees Fahrenheit (38.5 degrees Celsius).Seek emergency care for symptoms of stroke, which include:Sickle cell anemia is caused by a change in the gene that tells the body to make hemoglobin. Hemoglobin is the iron-rich compound in red blood cells that allows these cells to carry oxygen from the lungs to the rest of the body. The hemoglobin associated with sickle cell anemia causes red blood cells to become rigid, sticky and misshapen.For a child to have sickle cell anemia, both parents must carry one copy of the sickle cell gene and pass both copies to the child.If only one parent passes the sickle cell gene to the child, that child will have the sickle cell trait. With one typical hemoglobin gene and one sickle cell gene, people with the sickle cell trait make both typical hemoglobin and sickle cell hemoglobin.Their blood might contain some sickle cells, but they generally don't have symptoms. They're carriers of the disease. That means they can pass the gene to their children.For a baby to have sickle cell anemia, both parents must carry a sickle cell gene. In the United States, sickle cell anemia most commonly affects people of African, Mediterranean and Middle Eastern descent.Sickle cell anemia can lead to a host of complications, including:If you carry the sickle cell trait, it can help to see a genetic counselor before you get pregnant. A counselor can help you understand your risk of having a child with sickle cell anemia. You also can learn about possible treatments, preventive measures and reproductive options.Dec 22, 2023CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.