Sinus headaches are headaches that may feel like an infection in the sinuses (sinusitis). You may feel pressure around the eyes, cheeks and forehead. Perhaps your head throbs.But, this pain might actually be caused by a migraine.Signs and symptoms of sinus headaches may include:Migraines and headaches from sinusitis are easy to confuse because the signs and symptoms of the two types of headaches may overlap.Both migraine and sinusitis headache pain often get worse when you bend forward. Migraine can also be accompanied by various nasal signs and symptoms — including congestion, facial pressure and a clear, watery nasal discharge. These are due to involvement of the autonomic nervous system in a migraine attack. In fact, studies have shown that most people who see a health care provider for sinus headaches are found to have migraines instead.Sinusitis, however, usually isn't associated with nausea or vomiting or aggravated by noise or bright light — all common features of migraines.Sinusitis usually:Headaches due to sinus disease often last days or longer, and migraines most commonly last hours to a day or two.Consult your provider if:Sinus headaches are usually associated with migraines or other forms of headaches.Sinus headaches are associated with pain and pressure in the face and sinuses and can cause nasal symptoms. Most of these headaches are not caused by sinus infections and generally should not be treated with antibiotics.Sinus headaches can affect anyone but may be more likely if you have:Whether or not you take preventive medications, you may benefit from lifestyle changes that can help reduce the number and severity of headaches. One or more of these suggestions may be helpful for you:Avoid triggers. If certain foods or odors seem to have triggered your headaches in the past, avoid them. Your provider may recommend you reduce your caffeine and alcohol intake and avoid tobacco.In general, establish a daily routine with regular sleep patterns and regular meals. In addition, try to control stress.Exercise regularly. Regular aerobic exercise reduces tension and can help prevent headaches. If your provider agrees, choose any aerobic exercise you enjoy, including walking, swimming and cycling.Warm up slowly, however, because sudden, intense exercise can cause headaches.Obesity is also thought to be a factor in headaches, and regular exercise can help you maintain a healthy weight or lose weight.Reduce the effects of estrogen. If estrogen seems to trigger or make your headaches worse, you may want to avoid or reduce the medications you take that contain estrogen.These medications include birth control pills and hormone replacement therapy. Talk with your provider about the appropriate alternatives or dosages for you.May 17, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.