Sjogren's (SHOW-grins) syndrome is a disorder of your immune system identified by its two most common symptoms — dry eyes and a dry mouth.The condition often accompanies other immune system disorders, such as rheumatoid arthritis and lupus. In Sjogren's syndrome, the mucous membranes and moisture-secreting glands of your eyes and mouth are usually affected first — resulting in decreased tears and saliva.Although you can develop Sjogren's syndrome at any age, most people are older than 40 at the time of diagnosis. The condition is much more common in women. Treatment focuses on relieving symptoms.There are three pairs of major salivary glands. These glands are the parotid, sublingual and submandibular glands. Each gland has its own tube, called a duct, leading from the gland to the mouth.The two main symptoms of Sjogren's syndrome are:Some people with Sjogren's syndrome also have one or more of the following:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesSjogren's syndrome is an autoimmune disorder. Your immune system mistakenly attacks your body's own cells and tissues.Scientists aren't certain why some people develop Sjogren's syndrome. Certain genes put people at higher risk of the disorder, but it appears that a triggering mechanism — such as infection with a particular virus or strain of bacteria — is also necessary.In Sjogren's syndrome, your immune system first targets the glands that make tears and saliva. But it can also damage other parts of your body, such as:Sjogren's syndrome typically occurs in people with one or more known risk factors, including:The most common complications of Sjogren's syndrome involve your eyes and mouth.Less common complications might affect:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Dry eyes.Dry mouth.Age.Sex.Rheumatic disease.Dental cavities.Yeast infections.Vision problems.Lungs, kidneys or liver.Lymph nodes.Nerves.Advertising & Sponsorship