Sleepwalking, also known as somnambulism, is when people get up and walk around while asleep. It's more common in children than adults. Children usually outgrow sleepwalking by the teen years. Sleepwalking that happens once in a while often isn't a serious problem and doesn't need treatment. But sleepwalking that happens a lot may suggest an underlying sleep disorder.Sleepwalking in adults is more likely to be confused with, or happen as part of, other sleep disorders. Medical conditions also can cause people to walk in their sleep.If people in your household sleepwalk, it's important to take steps to help prevent them from getting injured while sleepwalking.Sleepwalking usually occurs early in the night — often 1 to 2 hours after falling asleep. It isn't likely to happen during naps, but it is possible. A bout of sleepwalking can occur rarely or often. A bout generally lasts several minutes, but it can last longer.People who sleepwalk may:Sometimes, people who sleepwalk will:Occasional bouts of sleepwalking aren't usually a cause for concern. They usually go away on their own. You can simply mention the sleepwalking at a routine physical or well-child exam.See your healthcare professional if the bouts of sleepwalking:Sleepwalking is classified as a parasomnia — an undesirable behavior or event during sleep. Sleepwalking is a disorder of arousal. This means it occurs during N3 sleep, the deepest stage of non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep. Another NREM disorder is sleep terrors, which can occur with sleepwalking.Many factors can lead to sleepwalking, including:Sometimes underlying conditions that affect sleep can cause sleepwalking, such as:Factors that may raise the risk of sleepwalking include:Sleepwalking itself isn't necessarily a concern, but people who sleepwalk can:Rarely, people who sleepwalk can injure someone else nearby.Sleepwalking care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Genetics.Age.Advertising & Sponsorship