Small bowel prolapse (enterocele) occurs when muscles and tissues that hold the intestines (small bowel) in place inside the pelvic cavity weaken, causing the small bowel to descend and bulge into the vagina.Small bowel prolapse, also called enterocele (EN-tur-o-seel), occurs when the small intestine (small bowel) descends into the lower pelvic cavity and pushes at the top part of the vagina, creating a bulge. The word "prolapse" means to slip or fall out of place.Childbirth, aging and other processes that put pressure on your pelvic floor may weaken the muscles and ligaments that support pelvic organs, making small bowel prolapse more likely to occur.To manage small bowel prolapse, self-care measures and other nonsurgical options are often effective. In severe cases, you may need surgery to fix the prolapse.Mild small bowel prolapse may produce no signs or symptoms. However, if you have significant prolapse, you might experience:Many women with small bowel prolapse also experience prolapse of other pelvic organs, such as the bladder, uterus or rectum.See your doctor if you develop signs or symptoms of prolapse that bother you.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Get the latest information from our Mayo Clinic experts on women’s health topics, serious and complex conditions, wellness and more. Click to view a preview and subscribe below.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesIncreased pressure on the pelvic floor is the main reason for any form of pelvic organ prolapse. Conditions and activities that can cause or contribute to small bowel prolapse or other types of prolapse include:Pregnancy and childbirth are the most common causes of pelvic organ prolapse. The muscles, ligaments and fascia that hold and support your vagina stretch and weaken during pregnancy, labor and delivery.Not everyone who has had a baby develops pelvic organ prolapse. Some women have very strong supporting muscles, ligaments and fascia in the pelvis and never have a problem. It's also possible for a woman who's never had a baby to develop pelvic organ prolapse.Factors that increase your risk of developing small bowel prolapse include:You may be able to lower your chances of small bowel prolapse with these strategies:Small bowel prolapse (enterocele) care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Pregnancy and childbirth.Age.Pelvic surgery.Increased abdominal pressure.Smoking.Race.Connective tissue disorders.Maintain a healthy weight.Prevent constipation.Treat a chronic cough.Quit smoking.Avoid heavy lifting.Advertising & Sponsorship