Capsule endoscopy is often used to see the inside of the small intestine. The small intestine has three sections — the duodenum, jejunum and ileum. It runs from the stomach to the large intestine.Small bowel cancer is a type of cancer that starts as a growth of cells in the small intestine. The small intestine, also called the small bowel, is a long tube that carries digested food between the stomach and the large intestine.The small intestine digests and absorbs nutrients from the foods you eat. It produces hormones that help with digestion. The small intestine also plays a role in the body's germ-fighting immune system. It contains cells that fight bacteria and viruses that enter the body through the mouth.Small bowel cancer treatment usually involves surgery to remove the cancer. Other treatments include chemotherapy and targeted therapy, which use medicines to kill cancer cells. Radiation therapy also may be used to shrink the cancer before surgery.Symptoms of small bowel cancer include:There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Subscribe for free and receive an in-depth guide to coping with cancer, plus helpful information on how to get a second opinion. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview.ErrorSelect a topicErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.Your in-depth coping with cancer guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest about cancer news, research, and care.If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe cause of small bowel cancer isn't known. What's known is that something happens to cells in the small bowel that changes them into cancer cells.Small bowel cancer happens when cells develop changes in their DNA. A cell's DNA holds the instructions that tell the cell what to do. The changes tell the cells to multiply quickly. The cells continue living when healthy cells would die as part of their natural life cycle. This causes too many cells. The cells might form a mass called a tumor. The cells can invade and destroy healthy body tissue. In time, the cells can break away and spread to other parts of the body.The type of small bowel cancer you have is based on the type of cell where your cancer began. Examples of small bowel cancer types include:Your health care team considers your type of small bowel cancer when creating a treatment plan.Factors that may increase the risk of small bowel cancer include:Small bowel cancer can cause complications, including:It's not clear what may help to reduce the risk of small bowel cancer. If you're interested in reducing your risk of cancer in general, it may help to: Small bowel cancer care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Colorectal Cancer support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.57 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 87 Replies Mon, Jun 17, 2024 35 Replies Wed, Jun 12, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Adenocarcinoma.Neuroendocrine tumors.Lymphoma.Soft tissue sarcoma.DNA changes that run in families.Other bowel diseases.Weakened immune system.What you eat and drink.An increased risk of other cancers.Cancer that spreads to other parts of the body.Eat a variety of fruits, vegetables and whole grains.Drink alcohol in moderation, if at all.Stop smoking.Exercise most days of the week.Maintain a healthy weight.Advertising & Sponsorship