Solitary rectal ulcer syndrome is a condition that occurs when one or more open sores (ulcers) develop in the rectum. The rectum is a muscular tube connected to the end of your colon. Stool passes through the rectum on its way out of the body.Solitary rectal ulcer syndrome is a rare and poorly understood disorder that often occurs in people with chronic constipation. Solitary rectal ulcer syndrome can cause rectal bleeding and straining during bowel movements. Despite the name, sometimes more than one rectal ulcer occurs in solitary rectal ulcer syndrome.Solitary rectal ulcer syndrome may improve with simple lifestyle strategies, such as changing your diet and drinking more fluids. In severe cases, however, surgery may be needed.Signs and symptoms of solitary rectal ulcer syndrome include:However, some people with solitary rectal ulcer syndrome may experience no symptoms.Make an appointment with your doctor if you notice any signs or symptoms that worry you.Several other conditions may cause signs and symptoms similar to those of solitary rectal ulcer syndrome. At your appointment, your doctor may recommend tests and procedures to identify or rule out causes other than solitary rectal ulcer syndrome.It's not always clear what causes solitary rectal ulcer syndrome. Doctors believe stress or injury to the rectum may cause rectal ulcers to form.Among the things that could injure the rectum are: Rectal prolapse occurs when the rectum becomes stretched out and protrudes from the anus. Intussusception is a rare, serious disorder in which one part of the intestine slides inside an adjacent part. Apr 06, 2023CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.