Spina bifida is a condition that occurs when the spine and spinal cord don't form properly. It's a type of neural tube defect. The neural tube is the structure in a developing embryo that later becomes the baby's brain and spinal cord and the tissues that enclose them.Typically, the neural tube forms early in pregnancy and closes by the 28th day after conception. In babies with spina bifida, a portion of the neural tube doesn't close all the way. This affects the spinal cord and bones of the spine.Spina bifida can range from being mild to causing serious disabilities. Symptoms depend on where on the spine the opening is located and how big it is. Symptoms also depend on whether the spinal cord and nerves are involved. When necessary, early treatment for spina bifida involves surgery. However, surgery doesn't always completely restore lost function.Myelomeningocele is the most serious type of spina bifida. The spinal cord's protective covering and the spinal nerves protrude at birth, forming a sac on the baby's back. The exposed nervous system may become infected, so prompt surgery is needed after birth.Spina bifida occurs in different types: spina bifida occulta, myelomeningocele (my-uh-lo-muh-NING-go-seel) or the very rare type, meningocele (muh-NING-go-seel).Occulta means hidden. Spina bifida occulta is the mildest and most common type. This type of spina bifida results in a small separation or gap in one or more of the bones of the spine, called vertebrae. Many people who have spina bifida occulta don't know they have it. It may be found during an imaging test such as an X-ray that is done for another reason.Myelomeningocele is the most serious type. It also is known as open spina bifida. The spinal canal is open along several vertebrae in the lower or middle back. Part of the spinal cord, including the spinal cord's protective covering and spinal nerves, push through this opening at birth, forming a sac on the baby's back. Tissues and nerves usually are exposed. This makes the baby prone to dangerous infections. This type also may cause loss of movement in the legs, and bladder and bowel dysfunction.This is a rare type of spina bifida. In this type, a sac of spinal fluid bulges through an opening in the spine. No nerves are affected and the spinal cord isn't in the fluid sac. Babies with meningocele may have some minor trouble with functioning, including with the bladder and bowels.Symptoms of spina bifida vary by type and from one person to another.Typically, myelomeningocele is diagnosed before or right after birth, when medical care is available. Children diagnosed with this condition should be followed by a specialized team of healthcare professionals throughout their lives. Families can be educated on the different complications to watch for.Children with spina bifida occulta typically don't have symptoms or complications. In these children, usually only routine pediatric care is needed.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe cause of spina bifida is not known. It's thought that a combination of genetic, nutritional and environmental risk factors causes the condition. This includes having a family history of neural tube defects and getting too little folate, also known as vitamin B-9, during pregnancy.Spina bifida is more common among Hispanic people and white people. Also, female babies are affected more often than male babies. Although healthcare professionals and researchers don't know why spina bifida occurs, they have identified some risk factors:Family history of neural tube defects. Having one child with a condition that affects the neural tube slightly increases the chance of having another baby with the same condition. The risk increases even more if two previous children have been affected by the condition.Also, being born with a neural tube defect increases the chance of giving birth to a child with spina bifida. However, most babies with spina bifida are born to parents with no known family history of the condition.If you have known risk factors for spina bifida, talk with your healthcare professional. You may need a larger dose or prescription dose of folic acid, even before a pregnancy begins.Also tell your healthcare professional about all of the medicines you take. If you plan ahead, some medicines can be adjusted to lower the potential risk of spina bifida.Spina bifida may cause minimal symptoms or it can lead to more-serious physical conditions. Symptoms are affected by:A number of complications may affect children with spina bifida. But not all children get all of these complications. Many complications can be treated.You can greatly reduce your risk of having a baby with spina bifida or other neural tube defects by taking folic acid supplements. Begin taking the supplements at least one month before becoming pregnant and continue taking them through the first trimester of pregnancy.Having enough folic acid in your body by the early weeks of pregnancy is critical to prevent spina bifida. But many people don't discover that they're pregnant until this time. For this reason, experts recommend that all people of childbearing age take a supplement of 400 micrograms (mcg) of folic acid a day.It's also helpful to eat foods that contain folate or have had folic acid added to them, known as fortification. Foods that are fortified with folic acid include:Folic acid may be listed on food packages as folate, which is the natural form of folic acid found in foods.Adults who are planning pregnancy or who could become pregnant need to get 400 to 800 mcg of folic acid a day.The body doesn't absorb folate as easily as it absorbs folic acid, and most people don't get the recommended amount of folate through diet alone. Vitamin supplements that include folic acid are necessary to prevent spina bifida. It's also possible that folic acid may help lower the risk of other conditions that may be present at birth. These conditions include a cleft lip, a cleft palate and some heart conditions.It's also a good idea to eat a healthy diet that includes foods rich in folate or fortified with folic acid. This vitamin is present naturally in many foods, including:If you have spina bifida or if you've previously given birth to a child with spina bifida, you need extra folic acid before you become pregnant. If you're taking anti-seizure medicines or you have diabetes, you also may benefit from a higher dose of this B vitamin. Check with your healthcare professional before taking additional folic acid supplements.Spina bifida care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Spina bifida occulta.Meningocele.Myelomeningocele.Too little folate in the pregnant person's body.Family history of neural tube defects.Some medicines.Diabetes.Obesity.Increased body temperature.Walking and mobility problems.Orthopedic complications.Bowel and bladder symptoms.Buildup of fluid in the brain, known as hydrocephalus.Shunt malfunction.Chiari malformation type 2.Infection in the tissues surrounding the brain, known as meningitis.Tethered spinal cord.Sleep-disordered breathing.Skin problems.Latex allergy.Other complications.Advertising & Sponsorship