Spontaneous coronary artery dissection is an emergency condition that occurs when a tear forms in a wall of a heart artery. Spontaneous coronary artery dissection also is called SCAD.SCAD can slow or block blood flow to the heart, causing a heart attack, heart rhythm problems or sudden death.SCAD most commonly affects women in their 40s and 50s, though it can occur at any age and can occur in men. People who have SCAD often don't have risk factors for heart disease, such as high blood pressure, high cholesterol or diabetes.SCAD can cause sudden death if it isn't treated promptly. Get emergency medical help if you have heart attack symptoms — even if you think you aren't at risk of a heart attack.A tear develops on the inside of a coronary artery, allowing blood to create a split between two layers of the wall. This may result in a loose flap of tissue on the inside of the artery. Sometimes, the split remains small, but the blood in between the layers can clot. This clot, called an intramural hematoma, may cause the normal artery channel to become narrow, blocking blood flow to the heart.Symptoms of SCAD can include:Call 911 or your local emergency number if you have chest pain or think you might be having a heart attack. If you don't have access to emergency medical services, have someone drive you to the nearest hospital. Do not drive yourself unless you have no other choice.The cause of spontaneous coronary artery dissection is unknown.Risk factors for SCAD include:In spontaneous coronary artery dissection, also called SCAD, a tear forms in an artery in the heart. This can cause blood to pool in the area between the layers. SCAD can reduce or block blood flow through the artery, which can cause a heart attack. A heart attack as a result of SCAD is different from a heart attack caused by atherosclerosis.A possible complication of SCAD is heart attack. SCAD slows or stops blood flow through an artery. This weakens the heart and may lead to a heart attack. A heart attack from SCAD is different from a heart attack caused by a buildup of fats, cholesterol and other substances in and on the artery walls. This condition is called atherosclerosis.In some people with SCAD, the inner and outer layers of the artery may split. Blood can collect between these layers. Pressure from the pooled blood can make SCAD worse.Even with successful treatment, SCAD can happen more than once. It might happen soon after the first episode or years later. People who have SCAD also may have a higher risk of other heart problems. These problems include heart failure due to the heart attack damage.Spontaneous coronary artery dissection (SCAD) care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart & Blood Health support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.346 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 58 Replies Thu, Jun 20, 2024 106 Replies Wed, Jun 19, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Being female.Childbirth.Extreme stress.Fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD).Genetic conditions affecting connective tissue.Very high blood pressure.Illegal drug use.Advertising & Sponsorship