Sun-exposed areas such as the lips and ears are especially likely to develop squamous cell carcinoma of the skin.Squamous cell carcinoma of the skin is a type of cancer that starts as a growth of cells on the skin. It starts in cells called squamous cells. The squamous cells make up the middle and outer layers of the skin. Squamous cell carcinoma is a common type of skin cancer.Squamous cell carcinoma of the skin is usually not life-threatening. But if it's not treated, squamous cell carcinoma of the skin can grow large or spread to other parts of the body. The growth of the cancer can cause serious complications.Most squamous cell carcinomas of the skin are caused by too much ultraviolet (UV) radiation. UV radiation comes either from sunlight or from tanning beds or lamps. Protecting your skin from UV light can help reduce the risk of squamous cell carcinoma of the skin and other forms of skin cancer.Squamous cell carcinomas can be anywhere on the skin. In people who sunburn easily, the cancer is usually found on areas of skin that have had a lot of sun. In people with Black and brown skin, squamous cell carcinomas are more likely to be on skin that isn't exposed to sun, such as the genitals.Squamous cell carcinoma of the skin most often occurs on sun-exposed skin. This includes the scalp, the backs of the hands, the ears or the lips. But it can occur anywhere on the body. It can even occur inside the mouth, on the bottoms of the feet or on the genitals. When squamous cell carcinoma of the skin happens in people with Black and brown skin, it tends to happen in places that aren't exposed to the sun.Symptoms of squamous cell carcinoma of the skin include:Make an appointment with a health care professional for a sore or scab that doesn't heal in about two months or a flat patch of scaly skin that won't go away.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Subscribe for free and receive an in-depth guide to coping with cancer, plus helpful information on how to get a second opinion. You can unsubscribe at any time. Click here for an email preview.ErrorSelect a topicErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.Your in-depth coping with cancer guide will be in your inbox shortly. You will also receive emails from Mayo Clinic on the latest about cancer news, research, and care.If you don’t receive our email within 5 minutes, check your SPAM folder, then contact us at newsletters@mayoclinic.com.Please, try again in a couple of minutesSkin cancer begins in the cells that make up the outer layer of the skin, called the epidermis. One type of skin cancer called basal cell carcinoma begins in the basal cells. Basal cells make skin cells that keep pushing older cells toward the surface. As new cells move up, they become squamous cells. Skin cancer that starts in the squamous cells is called squamous cell carcinoma of the skin. Melanoma, another type of skin cancer, comes from the pigment cells, called melanocytes.Squamous cell carcinoma of the skin occurs when the squamous cells in the skin get changes in their DNA. Cells' DNA holds the instructions that tell cells what to do. The changes tell the squamous cells to multiply quickly. The cells continue living when healthy cells would die as part of their natural life cycle.This causes too many cells. The cells can invade and destroy healthy body tissue. In time, the cells can break away and spread to other parts of the body.Ultraviolet (UV) radiation causes most of the DNA changes in skin cells. UV radiation can come from sunlight, tanning lamps and tanning beds.But skin cancers also can grow on skin that's not usually in sunlight. This means that other factors might add to the risk of skin cancer. One such factor might be having a condition that weakens the immune system.Factors that can increase the risk of squamous cell carcinoma of the skin include:Having skin that sunburns easily. Anyone of any skin color can get squamous cell carcinoma of the skin. But it's more common in people who have low levels of melanin in their skin. Melanin is a substance that gives color to skin. It also helps protect the skin from damaging ultraviolet (UV) radiation. People with Black or brown skin have more melanin than people with white skin.The risk of squamous cell carcinoma is highest in people who have blond or red hair, have light-colored eyes and freckle or sunburn easily.Untreated squamous cell carcinoma of the skin can destroy nearby healthy tissue. It can spread to the lymph nodes or other organs. And it can be fatal, although this is not common.The risk of squamous cell carcinoma of the skin spreading may be higher if the cancer:Most squamous cell carcinomas of the skin can be prevented. To protect yourself:Check your skin often and report changes to your health care team. Look at your skin often for new growths. Look for changes in moles, freckles, bumps and birthmarks. Use mirrors to check your face, neck, ears and scalp.Look at your chest and trunk and the tops and undersides of your arms and hands. Look at the front and back of your legs and your feet. Look at the bottom of the feet and the spaces between your toes. Also check your genital area and between your buttocks.Squamous cell carcinoma of the skin care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Cancer support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.120 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 57 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 61 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Having skin that sunburns easily.Being in the sun too much.Using tanning beds.Having a history of sunburns.Having a history of precancerous skin lesions.Having a history of skin cancer.Having a weakened immune system.Having a rare genetic disorder.Having human papillomavirus infection (HPV).Having scars or long-lasting wounds on the skin.Stay out of the sun during the middle of the day.Wear sunscreen year-round.Wear protective clothing.Don't use tanning beds.Check your skin often and report changes to your health care team.Advertising & Sponsorship