Stage 4 prostate cancer happens when cancer spreads beyond the prostate to other parts of the body.Most prostate cancers are diagnosed when the cancer is only in the prostate. Sometimes prostate cancer doesn't cause symptoms, and the cancer may not be detected until it has spread. When prostate cancer spreads to other parts of the body, it's called metastatic cancer.Treatments can slow or shrink a stage 4 prostate cancer. But most stage 4 prostate cancers can't be cured. Still, treatments can lengthen life and reduce symptoms of cancer.Signs and symptoms of stage 4 prostate cancer may include:Make an appointment with a doctor or other health care professional if you have ongoing symptoms that worry you.The cause of stage 4 prostate cancer is not known. Stage 4 prostate cancer happens when prostate cancer cells break away from where they formed in the prostate. The cancer cells spread to other parts of the body.Prostate cancer starts when cells in the prostate develop changes in their DNA. A cell's DNA holds the instructions that tell a cell what to do. In healthy cells, the DNA gives instructions to grow and multiply at a set rate. The instructions tell the cells to die at a set time. In cancer cells, the DNA changes give different instructions. The changes tell the cancer cells to replicate much more quickly. Cancer cells can keep living when healthy cells would die. This causes too many cells.The cancer cells form a mass called a tumor in the prostate. These tumors can grow to invade and destroy nearby healthy tissue. In time, cancer cells can break away and spread to other parts of the body.Prostate cancer cells that spread past the prostate most often go to the:Factors that can increase the risk of stage 4 prostate cancer include:Stage 4 prostate cancer care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Prostate Cancer support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.53 Replies Tue, Jun 25, 2024 59 Replies Tue, Jun 25, 2024 65 Replies Tue, Jun 25, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Getting older.Having a family history of prostate cancer.Being Black.Advertising & Sponsorship