Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS) is a rare, serious disorder of the skin and mucous membranes. It's usually a reaction to medication that starts with flu-like symptoms, followed by a painful rash that spreads and blisters. Then the top layer of affected skin dies, sheds and begins to heal after several days.Stevens-Johnson syndrome is a medical emergency that usually requires hospitalization. Treatment focuses on removing the cause, caring for wounds, controlling pain and minimizing complications as skin regrows. It can take weeks to months to recover.A more severe form of the condition is called toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN). It involves more than 30% of the skin surface and extensive damage to the mucous membranes.If your condition was caused by a medication, you'll need to permanently avoid that drug and others like it.One to three days before a rash develops, you may show early signs of Stevens-Johnson syndrome, including:As the condition develops, other signs and symptoms include:Stevens-Johnson syndrome requires immediate medical attention. Seek emergency medical care if you experience signs and symptoms of this condition. Drug-induced reactions may occur during the use of a medication or up to two weeks after discontinuing it.Stevens-Johnson syndrome is a rare and unpredictable illness. Your health care provider may not be able to identify its exact cause, but usually the condition is triggered by medication, an infection or both. You may react to medication while you're using it or up to two weeks after you've stopped using it.Drugs that can cause Stevens-Johnson syndrome include:Infections that can cause Stevens-Johnson syndrome include pneumonia and HIV.Factors that increase your risk of developing Stevens-Johnson syndrome include:Stevens-Johnson syndrome complications include:If you've had this condition, avoid the medication that triggered it. If you've had Stevens-Johnson syndrome and your health care provider told you it was caused by a medication, avoid that drug and others like it. This is key to preventing a recurrence, which is usually more severe than the first episode and can be fatal.Your immediate blood relatives also might want to avoid this drug because sometimes this condition runs in families.Jan 07, 2023CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.