Stomach polyps — also called gastric polyps — are masses of cells that form on the lining inside your stomach. These polyps are rare and usually don't cause any signs or symptoms. Your stomach is a muscular sac about the size of a small melon that expands when you eat or drink. It holds as much as a gallon (3.8 liters) of food or liquid. Once your stomach breaks down the food, strong muscular contractions known as peristaltic waves push the food toward the pyloric valve. This valve leads to the upper portion of your small intestine, a segment known as the duodenum. Stomach polyps are most often discovered when your health care provider is examining you for some other reason.Most stomach polyps don't become cancerous. But certain types can increase your risk of stomach cancer. Depending on the type of stomach polyp you have, treatment might involve removing the polyp or monitoring it for changes.Stomach polyps usually don't cause symptoms.But as a stomach polyp enlarges, open sores called ulcers can develop on its surface. Rarely, the polyp can block the opening between your stomach and your small intestine.Symptoms include:See your health care provider if you have ongoing blood in your stool or other symptoms of stomach polyps.Stomach polyps form in response to damage to your stomach lining. The most common causes of stomach polyps are:Long-lasting stomach inflammation. Also known as gastritis, this condition can cause the formation of hyperplastic polyps and adenomas. Hyperplastic polyps are unlikely to become cancerous, although those larger than about 2/5 inch (1 centimeter) carry a greater risk.Adenomas are the least common type of stomach polyp but the type most likely to become cancerous. For that reason, they are generally removed.Regular use of certain stomach medications. Fundic gland polyps are common among people who regularly take proton pump inhibitors to reduce stomach acid. These polyps are generally small and aren't a cause for concern.A fundic gland polyp with a diameter larger than about 2/5 inch (1 centimeter) carries a small risk of cancer. Your health care provider might recommend stopping proton pump inhibitors or removing the polyp or both.Factors that increase your chances of developing stomach polyps include:Oct 18, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.