Stuttering is a speech condition that disrupts the normal flow of speech. Fluency means having an easy and smooth flow and rhythm when speaking. With stuttering, the interruptions in flow happen often and cause problems for the speaker. Other names for stuttering are stammering and childhood-onset fluency disorder.People who stutter know what they want to say, but they have a hard time saying it. For example, they may repeat or stretch out a word, a syllable, or a consonant or vowel sound. Or they may pause during speech because they've reached a word or sound that's hard to get out.Stuttering is common among young children as a usual part of learning to speak. Some young children may stutter when their speech and language abilities aren't developed enough to keep up with what they want to say. Most children outgrow this type of stuttering, called developmental stuttering.But sometimes stuttering is a long-term condition that remains into adulthood. This type of stuttering can affect self-esteem and communicating with other people.Children and adults who stutter may be helped by treatments such as speech therapy, electronic devices to improve speech fluency or a form of mental health therapy called cognitive behavioral therapy.Stuttering symptoms may include:These actions may happen when stuttering:Stuttering may be worse when the person is excited, tired or under stress, or when feeling self-conscious, hurried or pressured. Situations such as speaking in front of a group or talking on the phone can be especially hard for people who stutter.But most people who stutter can speak without stuttering when they talk to themselves and when they sing or speak along with someone else.It's common for children between the ages of 2 and 5 years to go through periods when they may stutter. For most children, this is part of learning to speak, and it gets better on its own. But stuttering that continues may need treatment to improve speech fluency.Call your healthcare professional for a referral to a specialist in speech and language called a speech-language pathologist. Or you can contact the speech-language pathologist directly for an appointment. Ask for help if stuttering:Researchers continue to study the underlying causes of developmental stuttering. A combination of factors may be involved.Stuttering that happens in children while they're learning to speak is called developmental stuttering. Possible causes of developmental stuttering include:Speech fluency can be disrupted from causes other than developmental stuttering.Males are much more likely to stutter than females are. Things that raise the risk of stuttering include:Stuttering can lead to:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Problems with speech motor control.Genetics.Neurogenic stuttering.Emotional distress.Psychogenic stuttering.Having a childhood developmental condition.Having relatives who stutter.Stress.Advertising & Sponsorship