Sudden infant death syndrome is the unexplained death of a baby. The baby is usually less than a year old and seems to be healthy. It often happens during sleep. Sudden infant death syndrome also is known as SIDS. It is sometimes called crib death because infants often die in their cribs.The cause of SIDS is unknown. But it may be caused by problems in the area of an infant's brain that controls breathing and waking up from sleep.Researchers have found some things that might put babies at higher risk. They've also found some things you can do to help protect your child from SIDS. The most important action may be to place a baby on the back to sleep.Both physical and sleep factors put an infant at risk of SIDS. These factors vary from child to child.Physical factors associated with SIDS include:A baby's sleeping position, items in the crib and other conditions may increase the risk of SIDS. Examples include:SIDS can happen to any infant. But researchers have found several factors that might raise the risk. They include:During pregnancy, mothers also affect their babies' risk of SIDS, especially if they:There's no definite way to prevent SIDS. But you can help your baby sleep more safely by following these tips:Back to sleep. Place your baby to sleep in the correct position — on the back. Be sure to use the back position every time you or anyone else puts your baby to sleep for the first year of life. Don't trust that others will place your baby to sleep in the correct position: Insist on it. This won't be needed once your baby can roll over both ways without help.Don't put your baby on the stomach or side to sleep. Advise a caregiver to only use the stomach position when the baby and caregiver are both in the same room and both are awake. Short periods of "tummy time" help a baby build muscle strength. But the baby should never be left alone during tummy time.Have your baby sleep in your room. If possible, your baby should sleep in your room with you, but not in the same bed. Have your baby sleep alone in a crib or bassinet with a mattress designed for infant bedding. Your baby should sleep in the same room with you for at least six months.Adult beds aren't safe for infants. A baby can become trapped and suffocate between the headboard slats. Those are the spaces between the mattress and the bed frame. A baby also can get trapped in the space between the mattress and the wall. And a baby can suffocate if a sleeping parent accidentally rolls over and covers the baby's nose and mouth.Offer a pacifier. Sucking on a pacifier at nap time or bedtime may reduce the risk of SIDS. Make sure the pacifier does not have a strap or cord. If you're breastfeeding, wait to offer a pacifier until you and your baby have settled into a nursing routine. It usually takes 3 to 4 weeks to set up a nursing routine.If your baby is not interested in the pacifier, don't force it. Try again another day. If the pacifier falls out while your baby is sleeping, don't put it back in.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Brain defects.Low birth weight.Respiratory infection.Sleeping on the stomach or side.Sleeping on a soft surface.Sharing a bed.Overheating.Sex.Age.Race.Family history.Secondhand smoke.Premature birth.Back to sleep.Keep the crib as bare as possible.Don't overheat your baby.Have your baby sleep in your room.Breastfeed your baby, if possible.Don't use baby monitors and other commercial devices that claim to reduce the risk of SIDS.Offer a pacifier.Vaccinate your baby.Advertising & Sponsorship