A swollen knee occurs when excess fluid collects in or around your knee joint. Health care providers might refer to this condition as an effusion (uh-FU-zhun) in your knee joint.A swollen knee may be the result of trauma, overuse injuries, or an underlying disease or condition. To find the cause of the swelling, your provider might need to test a sample of the fluid for infection, disease or blood from an injury.Removing some of the fluid may help reduce the pain and stiffness associated with the swelling. Once the underlying cause is known, treatment can begin.Signs and symptoms typically include:See your health care provider if self-care measures, such as ice and rest, don't improve symptoms. Seek immediate medical attention if one knee becomes red and feels warm to the touch compared with your other knee. This can be a sign of infection within the joint.Many types of problems, ranging from traumatic injuries to diseases and other conditions, can cause a swollen knee.Damage to any part of your knee can cause excess joint fluid to accumulate. Injuries that can cause fluid buildup in and around the knee joint include: The anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) is one of the key ligaments that help stabilize the knee joint. The connects the thighbone (femur) to the shinbone (tibia). It's most commonly torn during sports that involve sudden stops and changes in direction — such as basketball, soccer, tennis and volleyball. The meniscus is a C-shaped piece of tough, rubbery cartilage that acts as a shock absorber between the shinbone and the thighbone. It can be torn if you suddenly twist your knee while bearing weight on it. Underlying diseases and conditions that can produce fluid buildup in and around the knee joint include:Factors that may increase your risk of a swollen knee include:Complications of a swollen knee can include:A swollen knee is typically the result of an injury or chronic health condition. To manage your overall health and prevent injuries:Jun 16, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.