Synovial sarcoma is a rare type of cancer that tends to occur near large joints, mainly the knees. Synovial sarcoma usually affects young adults.Synovial sarcoma begins as a growth of cells that can multiply quickly and destroy healthy tissue. The first symptom is usually swelling or a lump under the skin. The lump may or may not hurt.Synovial sarcoma can occur almost anywhere in the body. The most common places are in the legs and arms.Synovial sarcoma is a type of cancer called a soft tissue sarcoma. These cancers happen in the body's connective tissues. There are many types of soft tissue sarcoma.Synovial sarcoma is usually slow growing, so it can be years before a diagnosis is made. Sometimes, synovial sarcoma is diagnosed in error as a joint problem, such as arthritis or bursitis.Tests and procedures used to diagnose synovial sarcoma include:Removing a sample of tissue for testing, also called biopsy. A biopsy is a procedure to remove a sample of tissue for testing in a lab. The tissue might be removed using a needle that is put through the skin and into the cancer. Sometimes surgery is needed to get the tissue sample.The sample is tested in a lab to see if it is cancer. Other special tests give more details about the cancer cells. Your health care team uses this information to make a treatment plan.Treatment options for synovial sarcoma include:Surgery. Surgery is the main treatment for synovial sarcoma. The goal is to remove the cancer and some of the healthy tissue around it. This can sometimes mean the removal of an entire muscle or muscle group.In the past, surgery might have included removing an arm or leg, known as amputation. But medical advances have made amputation less likely.To lower the chances of the cancer returning, radiation therapy or chemotherapy might be used as well.Radiation therapy. Radiation therapy uses powerful energy beams to kill cancer cells. During radiation therapy, you lie on a table while a machine moves around you. The machine directs radiation to precise points on the body.Radiation before surgery can shrink the cancer and make surgery success more likely. Radiation therapy after surgery can kill cancer cells that are still there.Connect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Sarcoma support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.803 Replies Mon, Jun 24, 2024 57 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 59 Replies Fri, Jun 21, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Imaging tests.Removing a sample of tissue for testing, also called biopsy.Surgery.Radiation therapy.Chemotherapy.Targeted therapy.Clinical trials.Advertising & Sponsorship