Tinnitus can be caused by a number of things, including broken or damaged hair cells in the part of the ear that receives sound (cochlea); changes in how blood moves through nearby blood vessels (carotid artery); problems with the joint of the jaw bone (temporomandibular joint); and problems with how the brain processes sound.Tinnitus is when you experience ringing or other noises in one or both of your ears. The noise you hear when you have tinnitus isn't caused by an external sound, and other people usually can't hear it. Tinnitus is a common problem. It affects about 15% to 20% of people, and is especially common in older adults.Tinnitus is usually caused by an underlying condition, such as age-related hearing loss, an ear injury or a problem with the circulatory system. For many people, tinnitus improves with treatment of the underlying cause or with other treatments that reduce or mask the noise, making tinnitus less noticeable.Tinnitus is most often described as a ringing in the ears, even though no external sound is present. However, tinnitus can also cause other types of phantom noises in your ears, including:Most people who have tinnitus have subjective tinnitus, or tinnitus that only you can hear. The noises of tinnitus may vary in pitch from a low roar to a high squeal, and you may hear it in one or both ears. In some cases, the sound can be so loud it interferes with your ability to concentrate or hear external sound. Tinnitus may be present all the time, or it may come and go.In rare cases, tinnitus can occur as a rhythmic pulsing or whooshing sound, often in time with your heartbeat. This is called pulsatile tinnitus. If you have pulsatile tinnitus, your doctor may be able to hear your tinnitus when he or she does an examination (objective tinnitus).Some people aren't very bothered by tinnitus. For other people, tinnitus disrupts their daily lives. If you have tinnitus that bothers you, see your doctor.About 1 in 5 people experience the perception of noise or ringing in the ears. It's called tinnitus.Dr. Gayla Poling says tinnitus can be perceived a myriad of ways. "Ninety percent of those with tinnitus have hearing loss." Hearing loss can be age-related, come from a one-time exposure, or exposure to loud sounds over a lifetime. Dr. Poling says the tiny hairs in our inner ear may play a role."Those little hair cells in our inner ear are really delicate structures. That's what is actually damaged with noise exposure."Dr. Poling says there's no scientifically proven cure for tinnitus, but there are treatment and management options."Something as simple as getting a hearing aid to really treat the hearing loss." Other options include using a sound generator or using a fan at night."There's something called 'tinnitus retraining therapy.'" There are more ear-level masking devices where you can hear sounds throughout the day, too, that are more distracting."If ringing in your ears bothers you, start by seeing your health care provider for a hearing test.For the Mayo Clinic News Network, I'm Ian Roth.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesA number of health conditions can cause or worsen tinnitus. In many cases, an exact cause is never found.In many people, tinnitus is caused by one of the following:Hearing loss. There are tiny, delicate hair cells in your inner ear (cochlea) that move when your ear receives sound waves. This movement triggers electrical signals along the nerve from your ear to your brain (auditory nerve). Your brain interprets these signals as sound.If the hairs inside your inner ear are bent or broken — this happens as you age or when you are regularly exposed to loud sounds — they can "leak" random electrical impulses to your brain, causing tinnitus.Medications. A number of medications may cause or worsen tinnitus. Generally, the higher the dose of these medications, the worse tinnitus becomes. Often the unwanted noise disappears when you stop using these drugs.Medications known to cause tinnitus include nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and certain antibiotics, cancer drugs, water pills (diuretics), antimalarial drugs and antidepressants.Less common causes of tinnitus include other ear problems, chronic health conditions, and injuries or conditions that affect the nerves in your ear or the hearing center in your brain.Anyone can experience tinnitus, but these factors may increase your risk:Tinnitus affects people differently. For some people, tinnitus can significantly affect quality of life. If you have tinnitus, you may also experience:Treating these linked conditions may not affect tinnitus directly, but it can help you feel better.In many cases, tinnitus is the result of something that can't be prevented. However, some precautions can help prevent certain kinds of tinnitus.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Hearing loss.Ear infection or ear canal blockage.Head or neck injuries.Medications.Meniere's disease.Eustachian tube dysfunction.Ear bone changes.Muscle spasms in the inner ear.Temporomandibular joint (TMJ) disorders.Acoustic neuroma or other head and neck tumors.Blood vessel disorders.Other chronic conditions.Loud noise exposure.Age.Sex.Tobacco and alcohol use.Certain health problems.Use hearing protection.Turn down the volume.Take care of your cardiovascular health.Limit alcohol, caffeine and nicotine.Advertising & Sponsorship