A transient ischemic attack (TIA) is a short period of symptoms similar to those of a stroke. It's caused by a brief blockage of blood flow to the brain. A TIA usually lasts only a few minutes and doesn't cause long-term damage.However, a TIA may be a warning. About 1 in 3 people who has a TIA will eventually have a stroke, with about half occurring within a year after the TIA.Often called a ministroke, a TIA can serve as both a warning of a future stroke and a chance to prevent it.Transient ischemic attacks usually last a few minutes. Most symptoms disappear within an hour. Rarely, symptoms may last up to 24 hours. The symptoms of a TIA are similar to those found early in a stroke. Symptoms happen suddenly and may include:You may have more than one TIA. Their symptoms may be similar or different depending on which area of the brain is involved.If you think you're having or have had a transient ischemic attack, get medical attention right away. TIAs most often occur hours or days before a stroke. Being evaluated quickly means healthcare professionals can pinpoint potential treatable conditions. Treating those conditions may help you prevent a stroke.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesThe cause of a transient ischemic attack is similar to the cause of an ischemic stroke, which is the most common type of stroke. In an ischemic stroke, a blood clot blocks the blood supply to part of the brain. In a TIA, unlike a stroke, the blockage is brief and there is no permanent damage.The blockage that occurs during a TIA often results from a buildup of cholesterol-containing fatty deposits called plaques in an artery. This is known as atherosclerosis. The buildup also may occur in an artery's branches that supply oxygen and nutrients to the brain.Plaques can decrease the blood flow through an artery or lead to the development of a clot. A blood clot that moves from another part of the body, such as the heart, to an artery that supplies the brain also may cause a TIA.Some risk factors of a transient ischemic attack and stroke can't be changed. Others you can control.You can't change these risk factors of a TIA and stroke. But knowing you have these risks can motivate you to change the risk factors you can control.You can control or treat a number of risk factors of a TIA and a stroke, including certain health conditions and lifestyle choices. Having one or more of these risk factors doesn't mean you'll have a stroke, but your risk increases if you have two or more of them.Knowing your risk factors and living healthfully are the best things you can do to prevent a transient ischemic attack. A healthy lifestyle includes getting regular medical checkups. Also:Transient ischemic attack (TIA) care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Family history.Age.Sex.Prior transient ischemic attack.Sickle cell disease.High blood pressure.High cholesterol.Cardiovascular disease.Carotid artery disease.Peripheral artery disease (PAD).Diabetes.High levels of homocysteine.Excess weight.COVID-19.Cigarette smoking.Physical inactivity.Poor nutrition.Heavy drinking.Use of illicit drugs.Don't smoke.Limit cholesterol and fat.Eat plenty of fruits and vegetables.Limit sodium.Exercise regularly.Limit alcohol intake.Maintain a healthy weight.Don't use illicit drugs.Control diabetes.Advertising & Sponsorship