Tricuspid atresia is a heart problem present at birth, known as a congenital heart defect. The valve isn't formed between the two right heart chambers. Instead, a solid sheet of tissue blocks the blood flow between the right heart chambers. The condition limits blood flow through the heart. Tricuspid atresia causes the right lower heart to be underdeveloped. In tricuspid atresia, the tricuspid valve is missing. Blood can't flow from the right upper heart chamber (right atrium) to the right lower heart chamber (right ventricle). This condition often includes an underdeveloped right ventricle as well as hole in the heart between the upper chambers (atrial septal defect). Sometimes, there's also a hole between the lower heart chambers (ventricular septal defect). People with tricuspid atresia can't get enough oxygen through the body. So they tire easily and they are often short of breath. Their skin and lips may look blue or gray.Tricuspid atresia is treated with multiple surgeries. Most babies with tricuspid atresia who have surgery live well into adulthood, though follow-up surgeries are often needed.Other names for tricuspid atresia are:Tricuspid atresia symptoms are usually seen soon after birth. Symptoms of tricuspid atresia may include:Some people with tricuspid atresia also develop symptoms of heart failure. Heart failure symptoms include:Serious congenital heart defects are diagnosed before or soon after your child is born. If you notice that your baby has changes in skin color, trouble breathing, slow growth or poor weight gain, contact your health care provider.Most congenital heart defects, including tricuspid atresia, result from changes that occur early as the baby's heart is developing before birth. The exact cause is usually unknown.To understand more about tricuspid atresia, it may be helpful to know how the heart typically works.The heart is divided into four chambers, two on the right and two on the left.To pump blood throughout the body, the heart uses its left and right sides for different tasks.Valves control the flow of blood into and out of the heart. The heart valves open to allow blood to move to the next chamber or to one of the arteries. The heart valves close to keep blood from flowing backward. A typical heart has two upper and two lower chambers. The upper chambers, the right and left atria, receive incoming blood. The lower chambers, the more muscular right and left ventricles, pump blood out of the heart. The heart valves, which keep blood flowing in the right direction, are gates at the chamber openings. In tricuspid atresia, the tricuspid valve is missing. A sheet of tissue blocks the flow of blood between the right heart chambers. There's no way for blood to move from the right upper chamber to the right lower chamber. The right side of the heart is no longer able to pump blood to the lungs.Instead, blood flows from the heart's right upper chamber directly to the left upper chamber through a hole in the wall between them. The hole is either a congenital heart defect called an atrial septal defect or a natural opening called the foramen ovale. When the foramen ovale doesn't close after birth, it's called a patent foramen ovale.How blood flows after that depends on whether there are other heart structure problems. In some babies with tricuspid atresia, blood moves from the left lower heart chamber into the body's main artery, the aorta. Then it goes to the lungs through a temporary connection called the ductus arteriosus. This connection typically closes after birth.Many babies born with tricuspid atresia also have a hole between the lower heart chambers. This hole is called a ventricular septal defect or ventricular septal defect (VSD). If this occurs, some blood can flow through the hole directly to the main lung artery. The amount of blood going to the lungs depends on the size of the VSD and whether the pulmonary valve is narrowed. If the VSD is large, too much blood can move to the lungs. This can cause heart failure.It's not entirely clear why congenital heart defects such as tricuspid atresia occur. But some risk factors have been identified. Many babies born with a genetic disorder called Down syndrome have tricuspid atresia.Other things that might increase your baby's risk of tricuspid atresia include:Tricuspid atresia restricts blood flow from the heart to the lungs. The right lower heart chamber is small and underdeveloped. A life-threatening complication of tricuspid atresia is a lack of oxygen to the body's tissues. This condition is called hypoxemia.Prompt treatment greatly improves the outcome for babies with tricuspid atresia. But complications may develop later in life. Complications of tricuspid atresia may include:Because the exact cause of most congenital heart defects is unknown, it may not be possible to prevent tricuspid atresia.If you have a family history of congenital heart defects or are at high risk of giving birth to a child with one, genetic screening may be recommended before or during pregnancy. Consider talking with a genetic counselor and a pediatric heart doctor about your specific risks.Some ways you can help prevent your baby's overall risk of congenital heart defects are to:Sep 29, 2022CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.