Trigger finger makes a finger get stuck in a bent position. It may straighten suddenly with a snap. The fingers most often affected are the ring finger and the thumb, but the condition can affect any finger.Trigger finger happens when the tendon that controls that finger can't glide smoothly in the sheath that surrounds it. This may occur if part of the tendon sheath becomes swollen or if a small lump forms on the tendon.The condition is most common in women over the age of 50. You may be at higher risk of trigger finger if you have diabetes, low thyroid function or rheumatoid arthritis.Treatment of trigger finger can include splinting, steroid injections or surgery.Symptoms of trigger finger may progress from mild to severe and include:Trigger finger can affect any finger, including the thumb. More than one finger may be affected at a time, and both hands might be involved. Triggering is usually worse in the morning.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesTrigger finger happens when the tendon that controls that finger can't glide smoothly in the sheath that surrounds it. This may occur if part of the tendon sheath becomes swollen or if a small lump forms. This lump is called a nodule.Tendons are tough cords that attach muscle to bone. Each tendon is surrounded by a protective sheath. Trigger finger occurs when the affected finger's tendon sheath becomes irritated and swollen. This makes it harder for the tendon to glide through the sheath.In most people, there's no explanation for why this irritation and swelling begins.The constant back-and-forth irritation can cause a small lump of tissue to form on the tendon. This lump is called a nodule. The nodule can make it even harder for the tendon to glide smoothly.Factors that put you at risk of developing trigger finger include:Trigger finger can make it harder to type, button a shirt or insert a key into a lock. It also can affect your ability to grip a steering wheel or grasp tools.Trigger finger care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Repeated gripping.Certain health problems.Your sex.Advertising & Sponsorship