Vaginitis is an inflammation of the vagina that can result in discharge, itching and pain. The cause is usually a change in the balance of vaginal bacteria or an infection. Reduced estrogen levels after menopause and some skin disorders also can cause vaginitis.The most common types of vaginitis are:Treatment depends on the type of vaginitis you have.Vaginitis signs and symptoms can include:If you have vaginal discharge, the characteristics of the discharge might indicate the type of vaginitis you have. Examples include:See your health care provider if you develop vaginal discomfort, especially if:You probably don't need to see your health care provider every time you have vaginal irritation and discharge, particularly if:The cause depends on what type of vaginitis you have:Bacterial vaginosis. This most common type of vaginitis results from a change of the bacteria found in your vagina, upsetting the balance. What causes the imbalance is unknown. It's possible to have bacterial vaginosis without symptoms.This type of vaginitis seems to be linked to but not caused by sex — especially if you have multiple sex partners or a new sex partner — but it also occurs in women who aren't sexually active.Trichomoniasis. This common sexually transmitted infection is caused by a microscopic, one-celled parasite called Trichomonas vaginalis. This organism spreads during sex with someone who has the infection.In men, the organism usually infects the urinary tract, but often it causes no symptoms. In women, trichomoniasis typically infects the vagina, and might cause symptoms. It also increases women's risk of getting other sexually transmitted infections.Factors that increase the risk of developing vaginitis include:Women with trichomoniasis or bacterial vaginosis are at a greater risk of getting sexually transmitted infections because of the inflammation caused by these disorders.Good hygiene might prevent some types of vaginitis from recurring and relieve some symptoms:Other things that might help prevent vaginitis include:Dec 22, 2021CON-XXXXXXXXMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.