A vaginal fistula is an unusual opening that forms between the vagina and another organ, such as the bladder, colon or rectum. Your healthcare professional might describe a vaginal fistula as a hole in the vagina that lets urine, gas or stool pass through the vagina.Vaginal fistulas can form after childbirth or after an injury, a surgery, an infection or radiation treatment. You may need surgery to fix a fistula.There are various types of vaginal fistulas. They are named based on the location of the fistula and organs they affect:Vaginal fistula symptoms can include:The exact symptoms a person has depend in part on the location of the fistula.Get a healthcare checkup if you think you have symptoms of a vaginal fistula. Tell your healthcare professional if you have symptoms that affect your daily life, relationships or mental health.Vaginal fistulas have many possible causes, including certain medical conditions and problems that can happen because of surgery. These causes include the following:Surgery complications. Surgeries that involve the vaginal wall, anus or rectum can lead to vaginal fistulas. So can surgery on the area between the vagina and anus, called the perineum. Fistulas can form for reasons such as injuries during surgery and infections after surgery. Skilled surgeons can repair injuries while operating, which lowers the risk of fistula. But complications such as fistulas are more common after surgery in people with diabetes or in people who use tobacco.Surgery to remove the uterus, called a hysterectomy, is an example of an operation that can raise the risk of a vaginal fistula. The risk is higher if the hysterectomy is more complex. For example, the risk rises if the surgery takes longer than five hours, or if it involves larger blood loss or the removal of more surrounding tissue.Childbirth injuries. A vaginal fistula could stem from tearing that sometimes happens when a baby's head comes through the opening of the vagina. Or a fistula might form due to an infection of a surgical cut made between the vagina and the anus to help deliver a baby. This cause is not common in developed countries.Being in labor a long time because the baby can't move into the birth canal can raise the risk of a vaginal fistula, mainly in developing countries. That's partly because access to emergency delivery measures such as C-section may be limited.A vaginal fistula has no clear risk factors.Vaginal fistulas can lead to other health conditions called complications. Complications of vaginal fistulas include:There are no steps you need to take to prevent a vaginal fistula.Vaginal fistula care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Vesicovaginal fistula.Ureterovaginal fistula.Urethrovaginal fistula.Rectovaginal fistula.Colovaginal fistula.Enterovaginal fistula.Surgery complications.Childbirth injuries.Crohn's disease.Certain cancers and radiation therapy.Diverticulitis.A large amount of stool stuck in the rectum.Advertising & Sponsorship