Veins return blood from the rest of the body to the heart. To return blood to the heart, the veins in the legs must work against gravity. Weakened valves, also called incompetent valves, within the veins might cause varicose veins. The weakened valves let blood pool in the veins instead of traveling to the heart. When blood pools in the veins, the veins become larger, making them show under the skin.Varicose veins are bulging, enlarged veins. Any vein that is close to the skin's surface, called superficial, can become varicosed. Varicose veins most often affect the veins in the legs. That's because standing and walking increase the pressure in the veins of the lower body.For many people, varicose veins are simply a cosmetic concern. So are spider veins, a common, mild form of varicose veins. But varicose veins can cause aching pain and discomfort. Sometimes they lead to more-serious health problems.Treatment involves exercising, raising legs when sitting or lying down, or wearing compression stockings. A procedure may be done to close or remove veins.Spider veins appear as thin, red lines or as weblike networks of blood vessels on the surface of the skin. Spider veins, a mild form of varicose veins, most often appear on the legs and feet.Varicose veins might not cause pain. Symptoms of varicose veins include:When there are painful symptoms of varicose veins, they might include:Spider veins are like varicose veins, but they're smaller. Spider veins are found closer to the skin's surface and might look like a spider's web.Spider veins occur on the legs but also can be found on the face. They vary in size and often look like a spider's web.If you worry about how your veins look and feel and self-care measures haven't helped, see your healthcare professional.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesWeak or damaged valves can lead to varicose veins. Arteries carry blood from the heart to the rest of the body. Veins return blood from the rest of the body to the heart. To return blood to the heart, the veins in the legs must work against gravity.Muscles tighten in the lower legs to act as pumps. Vein walls help blood return to the heart. Tiny valves in the veins open as blood flows toward the heart, then close to stop blood from flowing backward. If these valves are weak or damaged, blood can flow backward and pool in the veins, causing the veins to stretch or twist.The two main risk factors for varicose veins are:Other things that might increase the risk of varicose veins include:Complications of varicose veins are rare. They can include:Getting better blood flow and muscle tone might lower the risk of having varicose veins. The same ways you treat the discomfort from varicose veins can help prevent them. Try the following:Varicose veins care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Heart & Blood Health support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.346 Replies Sun, Jun 23, 2024 58 Replies Thu, Jun 20, 2024 106 Replies Wed, Jun 19, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Family history.Obesity.Age.Sex.Pregnancy.Standing or sitting for long periods of time.Ulcers.Blood clots.Bleeding.Leg swelling. Advertising & Sponsorship