Vocal cord paralysis is a condition that causes the loss of control of the muscles that control the voice. It happens when the nerve impulses to the voice box, also called the larynx, are disrupted. This results in paralysis of the vocal cord muscles.Vocal cord paralysis can make it hard to speak and even breathe. The vocal cords, also called vocal folds, do more than just produce sound. They also protect the airway. They prevent food, drink and even saliva from entering the windpipe and causing a person to choke.Possible causes of vocal cord paralysis include nerve damage during surgery, viral infections and certain cancers. Treatment for vocal cord paralysis usually involves surgery, and sometimes voice therapy.Vocal cords open when you breathe and then close to produce sound when vibrating together.Vocal cord paralysis usually involves the loss of control of only one vocal cord. Paralysis of both vocal cords is a rare but serious condition. This can make it hard to speak and can cause trouble with breathing and swallowing.The vocal cords are two flexible bands of muscle tissue that sit at the entrance to the windpipe, also known as the trachea. When speaking, the bands come together and vibrate to make sound. The rest of the time, the vocal cords are relaxed in an open position so that you can breathe.Symptoms of vocal cord paralysis may include:Contact your healthcare professional if you have a hoarse voice that can't be explained and that lasts for more than 2 to 4 weeks. Also see your healthcare professional if you notice any voice changes or discomfort.Vocal cord paralysis happens when nerve impulses to the voice box, known as the larynx, are disrupted. This causes the muscle to become paralyzed. Often the exact cause of vocal cord paralysis isn't known. But some known causes may include:Risk factors for vocal cord paralysis include:Breathing problems associated with vocal cord paralysis may be so mild that you just have a hoarse-sounding voice. Or they can be so serious that they're life-threatening.Vocal cord paralysis keeps the opening to the airway from completely opening or closing. This can cause someone to choke on or inhale food or liquid, known as aspiration. Aspiration that leads to severe pneumonia is rare but serious and requires immediate medical care.Our patients tell us that the quality of their interactions, our attention to detail and the efficiency of their visits mean health care like they've never experienced. See the stories of satisfied Mayo Clinic patients.Leslye Gale and her husband Broadcaster Leslye Gale experienced gradual voice loss but was determined to tough it out on the air. Finally, in February 2024, her vocal folds had grown so weak that she had no voice at all. Given that her job as an announcer for a radio station in Orlando keeps her on air for five hours each morning, this setback was more than a minor inconvenience — it also had the potential…Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Injury to the vocal cord during surgery.Neck or chest injury.Stroke.Tumors.Infections.Neurological conditions.Having throat or chest surgery.Having a neurological condition.Advertising & Sponsorship