Vulvodynia (vul-voe-DIN-e-uh) is a type of long-term pain or discomfort around the outer part of the female genitals, called the vulva. It lasts at least three months and has no clear cause. The pain, burning or irritation linked with vulvodynia can make you so uncomfortable that sitting for a long time or having sex becomes unthinkable. The condition can last for months to years.If you have symptoms of vulvodynia, don't let embarrassment or a lack of visible signs stop you from talking with your gynecologist or another healthcare professional. Treatments can ease your discomfort. And your care team might be able to find a cause for your pain. So, it's key to get a medical exam.The vulva is the outer part of the female genitalia, including the labia majora, labia minora and clitoris.The main vulvodynia symptom is pain in the vulva, which includes the opening of the vagina. The pain often is described as:You also may feel aching, throbbing and swelling.How often the symptoms happen and where exactly they're felt varies from person to person. Your pain might be constant, or it may come and go. It might flare up only when the vulva is touched. You might feel the pain throughout your entire vulva. This is called generalized vulvodynia. Or the pain may flare up in a certain area, such as the tissue surrounding the opening of the vagina, called the vestibule. This is known as localized vulvodynia, and it's more common than the generalized kind.The tissue of the vulva might look slightly inflamed or swollen. More often, your vulva doesn't look different than usual.If you have pain in your vulva, talk with your gynecologist or another member of your healthcare team. If you don't have a gynecologist, you might be referred to one. A healthcare professional needs to find out if your pain has a treatable cause that's different from vulvodynia, such as:Some people who don't realize they have vulvodynia try to ease their symptoms by using yeast infection treatments without a prescription. But it's key to get a checkup, so a member of your healthcare team can give you an exam and recommend the right treatment for you.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Get the latest information from our Mayo Clinic experts on women’s health topics, serious and complex conditions, wellness and more. Click to view a preview and subscribe below.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the email.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesExperts don't know what causes vulvodynia. Factors that might play a role include:Without treatment, vulvodynia can affect mental health, relationships and other aspects of your life.The condition is linked with anxiety and depression. It's also tied to less sexual desire, arousal and enjoyment. Fear of having painful sex can cause spasms in the muscles around the vagina, a condition called vaginismus. Intimacy issues such as these lead many people with vulvodynia to say they feel shame, lower self-esteem, negative about body image and lacking as a sexual partner.The pain and other symptoms of vulvodynia might make it harder to keep up with work. You may feel less social too. And you may have trouble getting quality sleep.Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Advertising & Sponsorship