As macular degeneration develops, clear, typical vision (left) becomes impaired by a general haziness. With advanced macular degeneration, a blind spot forms at the center of the visual field (right).Wet macular degeneration is a long-lasting eye disorder that causes blurred vision or a blind spot in the central vision. It's usually caused by blood vessels that leak fluid or blood into the macula (MAK-u-luh). The macula is the part of the retina that gives the eye clear vision in the direct line of sight.Wet macular degeneration is one of two types of age-related macular degeneration. The other type, dry macular degeneration, is more common and less severe. The wet type always begins as the dry type.Early detection and treatment of wet macular degeneration may help reduce vision loss. In some instances, early treatment may recover vision.Wet macular degeneration symptoms usually appear suddenly and worsen quickly. They may include:Macular degeneration doesn't affect side vision, so it doesn't cause total blindness.See your eye doctor if:These changes may be the first indication of macular degeneration, particularly if you're older than age 60.Your eye is a complex and compact structure measuring about 1 inch (2.5 centimeters) in diameter. It receives millions of pieces of information about the outside world, which are quickly processed by your brain.No one knows the exact cause of wet macular degeneration, but it develops in people who have dry macular degeneration. Of all people with age-related macular degeneration, about 20% have the wet form.Wet macular degeneration can develop in different ways:Factors that may increase your risk of macular degeneration include:People whose wet macular degeneration has progressed to central vision loss have a higher risk of depression and social isolation. With profound loss of vision, people may see visual hallucinations. This condition is known as Charles Bonnet syndrome.It's important to have routine eye exams to identify early signs of macular degeneration. The following measures may help reduce your risk of developing wet macular degeneration:Wet macular degeneration care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Vision loss caused by irregular blood vessel growth.Vision loss caused by fluid buildup in the back of the eye.Age.Family history and genetics.Race.Smoking.Obesity.Cardiovascular disease.Manage all other medical conditions.Don't smoke.Maintain a healthy weight and exercise regularly.Choose a diet rich in fruits and vegetables.Include fish in your diet.Advertising & Sponsorship