Wilms tumor is the most common type of kidney cancer in children. The kidneys are part of the urinary system, which removes waste from the body through urine. The urinary system also includes the ureters, bladder and urethra.Wilms tumor is a rare kidney cancer that mainly affects children. Also known as nephroblastoma, it's the most common cancer of the kidneys in children. Wilms tumor most often affects children ages 3 to 4. It becomes much less common after age 5, but it can affect older children and even adults.Wilms tumor mostly occurs in just one kidney. But it can sometimes be in both kidneys at the same time.Over the years, progress in the diagnosis and treatment of Wilms tumor has greatly improved the prognosis for children with this disease. With treatment, the outlook for most children with Wilms tumor is good.Symptoms of Wilms tumor vary a lot. Some children don't seem to have any symptoms. But others with Wilms tumor have one or more of these symptoms:Other symptoms might include:Make an appointment with your child's health care provider if you see symptoms that worry you. Wilms tumor is rare. So it's likely that something else is causing symptoms. But it's important to check out any concerns.It's not clear what causes Wilms tumor.Cancer begins when cells develop changes in their DNA. Cells' DNA holds the instructions that tell the cells what to do. The changes tell the cells to grow and multiply quickly. The cancer cells live while healthy cells die as part of their natural life cycle. With Wilms tumor, the changes make extra cells in the kidney that form the tumor.Rarely, DNA changes passed from parents to children can increase the risk of Wilms tumor.Factors that may increase the risk of Wilms tumor include:Wilms tumor occurs more often in children who have certain conditions present at birth, including:Wilms tumor can occur as part of rare syndromes, including:Wilms tumor can't be prevented.If a child has any of the conditions that increase the risk for Wilms tumor, a health care provider might suggest doing kidney ultrasounds at times to look for anything unusual in the kidneys. Although this screening can't prevent Wilms tumor, it may help find the disease at an early stage.Wilms tumor care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Adolescent & Young Adult (AYA) Cancer support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.4 Replies Tue, Jun 04, 2024 1 Replies Tue, Jun 04, 2024 3 Replies Thu, May 23, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Being Black.Having a family history of Wilms tumor.Aniridia.Hemihypertrophy.WAGR syndrome.Denys-Drash syndrome.Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome.Advertising & Sponsorship