The liver is the largest internal organ in the body. It's about the size of a football. It sits mainly in the upper right portion of the stomach area, above the stomach.Wilson's disease is a rare inherited condition that causes copper levels to build up in several organs, especially the liver, brain and eyes. Most people with Wilson's disease are diagnosed between the ages of 5 and 35. But younger and older people can be affected too.Copper plays a key role in building healthy nerves, bones, collagen and the skin pigment melanin. You usually take in copper from the food you eat. Your liver produces a substance called bile that removes any extra copper.But in people with Wilson's disease, copper isn't removed properly and instead builds up. Sometimes it can be life-threatening if it's not treated. When diagnosed early, Wilson's disease is treatable, and many people with the condition live normal lives.Wilson's disease is present at birth, but symptoms don't appear until copper levels build up in the brain, liver, eyes or another organ. Symptoms vary based on the parts of your body the disease affects.These symptoms can include:Make an appointment with your doctor or other primary care provider if you have symptoms that worry you, especially if a family member has Wilson's disease.Wilson's disease is caused by a changed gene inherited from each parent. Inheriting a changed gene from just one parent rarely affects a person's health. But that person has one changed gene and one typical gene. Two carriers of changed genes have a 25% chance of having a child with two typical genes, a 50% chance of having a child who is a carrier, and a 25% chance of having a child who is affected by Wilson's disease.Wilson's disease is caused by a changed gene passed down from each parent. If you get only one affected gene, you won't get the disease yourself, but you'll be a carrier. This means you could pass the affected gene to your children.You can be at greater risk of Wilson's disease if your parents or siblings have the condition. Ask your doctor whether you should have genetic testing to find out if you have Wilson's disease. Diagnosing the condition as early as possible greatly increases the chances of successful treatment.A healthy liver, at left, shows no signs of scarring. In cirrhosis, at right, scar tissue replaces healthy liver tissue.If Wilson's disease isn't treated, sometimes it can lead to death. Serious complications include:Wilson's disease care at Mayo ClinicConnect with others like you for support and answers to your questions in the Transplants support group on Mayo Clinic Connect, a patient community.1606 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 15 Replies Fri, Jun 21, 2024 100 Replies Sat, Jun 22, 2024 Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Scarring of the liver, also known as cirrhosis.Liver failure.Lasting nervous system issues.Kidney problems.Mental health issues.Blood problems.Advertising & Sponsorship