Wrist pain is often caused by sprains or fractures from sudden injuries. But wrist pain also can result from long-term problems, such as repetitive stress, arthritis and carpal tunnel syndrome.Because so many factors can lead to wrist pain, diagnosing the exact cause can be difficult. But an accurate diagnosis is essential for proper treatment and healing.Wrist pain may vary, depending on the cause. For example, osteoarthritis pain often is described as being similar to a dull toothache. Carpal tunnel syndrome usually causes a pins-and-needles feeling. This tingling sensation usually occurs in the thumb and index and middle fingers, especially at night. The precise location of wrist pain also provides clues to what's behind the symptoms.Not all wrist pain requires medical care. Minor sprains and strains usually respond to ice, rest and pain medications you can buy without a prescription. But if pain and swelling last longer than a few days or become worse, see your health care provider. Delayed diagnosis and treatment can lead to poor healing, reduced range of motion and long-term disability.There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.ErrorEmail field is requiredErrorInclude a valid email addressTo provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.Please, try again in a couple of minutesDamage to any of the parts of your wrist can cause pain and affect your ability to use your wrist and hand. The damage may result from:Your wrist is made up of eight small bones (carpal bones) plus two long bones in your forearm — the radius and the ulna.Wrist pain can happen to anyone — whether you're very sedentary, very active or somewhere in between. But the risk may be increased by:It's impossible to prevent the unforeseen events that often cause wrist injuries, but these basic tips may offer some protection:Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.Make your tax-deductible gift and be part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.Sudden impacts.Repetitive stress.Osteoarthritis.Rheumatoid arthritis.Carpal tunnel syndrome.Ganglion cysts.Kienbock disease.Sports participation.Repetitive work.Certain diseases or conditions.Build bone strength.Prevent falls.Use protective gear for athletic activities.Pay attention to ergonomics.Advertising & Sponsorship